how many of you have seen the alfred hitchcock film the birds ?
any of you get really freaked out by that ?
you might want to leave now .
so this is a vending machine for crows .
and over the past few days many of you have been asking me how did you come to this ? how did you get started doing this ? 
and it started as with many great ideas or many ideas you can t get rid of anyway at a cocktail party .
about years ago i was at a cocktail party with a friend of mine and we re sitting there and he was complaining about the crows that he had seen that were all over his yard and making a big mess .
and he was telling me that really we ought to try and eradicate these things .
we gotta kill them because they re making a mess .
i said that was stupid you know maybe we should just train them to do something useful .
and he said that was impossible .
and i m sure i m in good company in finding that tremendously annoying when someone tells you it s impossible .
so i spent the next years reading about crows in my spare time .
and after years of this my wife eventually said look you know you gotta do this thing you ve been talking about and build the vending machine . 
so i did .
and i m talking specifically about synanthropic species which are species that have adapted specifically for human ecologies 
species like rats and cockroaches and crows .
and as i started looking at them i was finding that they had hyper adapted .
they d become extremely adept at living with us .
and in return we just tried to kill them all the time .
and in doing so we were breeding them for parasitism .
we were giving them all sorts of reasons to adapt new ways .
so for example rats are incredibly responsive breeders .
and cockroaches as anyone who s tried to get rid of them knows have become really immune to the poisons that we re using .
so i thought let s build something that s mutually beneficial .
well then let s build something that we can both benefit from and find some way to make a new relationship with these species .
and so i built the vending machine .
but the story of the vending machine is a little more interesting if you know more about crows .
it turns out that crows aren t just surviving with human beings they re actually really thriving .
they re found everywhere on the planet except for the arctic and the southern tip of south america .
and in all that area they re only rarely found breeding more than five kilometers away from human beings .
so we may not think about them but they re always around .
and not surprisingly given the human population growth more than half of the human population is living in cities now .
and out of those nine tenths of the human growth population is occurring in cities .
we re seeing a population boom with crows .
so bird counts are indicating that we might be seeing up to exponential growth in their numbers .
so that s no great surprise .
but what was really interesting to me was to find out that the birds were adapting in a pretty unusual way .
and i ll give you an example of that .
so this is betty . she s a new caledonian crow .
and these crows use sticks in the wild to get insects and whatnot out of pieces of wood .
here she s trying to get a piece of meat out of a tube .
but the researchers had a problem .
they messed up and left just a stick of wire in there .
and she hadn t had the opportunity to do this before .
you see it wasn t working very well .
so she adapted .
now this is completely unprompted . she had never seen this done before .
no one taught her to bend this into a hook had shown her how it could happen .
but she did it all on her own .
so keep in mind that she s never seen this done .
right .
yeah . all right .
that s the part where the researchers freak out .
so it turns out we ve been finding more and more that crows are really really intelligent .
their brains are proportionate in the same proportion as chimpanzee brains are . there are all kinds of anecdotes for different kinds of intelligence they have . for example in sweden crows will wait for fishermen to drop lines through holes in the ice .
and when the fishermen move off the crows fly down reel up the lines and eat the fish or the bait .
it s pretty annoying for the fishermen .
on an entirely different tack at university of washington they a few years ago were doing an experiment where they captured some crows on campus .
some students went out and netted some crows brought them in and were weighed them and measured them and whatnot and then let them back out again .
and were entertained to discover that for the rest of the week these crows whenever these particular students walked around campus these crows would caw at them and run around and make their life kind of miserable .
they were significantly less entertained when this went on for the next week .
and the next month . and after summer break .
until they finally graduated and left campus and glad to get away i m sure came back sometime later and found the crows still remembered them .
so the moral being don t piss off crows .
so now students at the university of washington that are studying these crows do so with a giant wig and a big mask .
it s fairly interesting .
so we know that these crows are really smart but the more i dug into this the more i found that they actually have an even more significant adaptation .
video crows have become highly skilled at making a living in these new urban environments .
in this japanese city they have devised a way of eating a food that normally they can t manage drop it among the traffic .
the problem now is collecting the bits without getting run over .
wait for the light to stop the traffic .
then collect your cracked nut in safety .
joshua klein yeah yeah . pretty interesting . so what s significant about this isn t that crows are using cars to crack nuts .
in fact that s old hat for crows .
this happened about years ago in a place called sendai city at a driving school in the suburbs of tokyo .
and since that time all of the crows in the neighborhood are picking up this behavior .
and now every crow within five kilometers is standing by a sidewalk waiting to collect its lunch .
so they re learning from each other . and research bears this out .
parents seem to be teaching their young .
they ve learned from their peers . they ve learned from their enemies .
if i have a little extra time i ll tell you about a case of crow infidelity that illustrates that nicely .
the point being that they ve developed cultural adaptation .
and as we heard yesterday that s the pandora s box that s getting human beings in trouble and we re starting to see it with them .
they re able to very quickly and very flexibly adapt to new challenges and new resources in their environment 
which is really useful if you live in a city .
so we know that there s lots of crows . we found out they re really smart and we found out that they can teach each other .
and when all this became clear to me i realized the only obvious thing to do is build a vending machine .
so that s what we did .
this is a vending machine for crows .
and it uses skinnerian training to shape their behavior over four stages . it s pretty simple .
basically what happens is that we put this out in a field or someplace where there s lots of crows and we put coins and peanuts all around the base of the machine .
and crows eventually come by and eat the peanuts and get used to the machine being there .
and eventually they eat up all the peanuts .
and then they see that there are peanuts here on the feeder tray and they hop up and help themselves .
and then they leave and the machine spits up more coins and peanuts and life is really dandy if you re a crow . then you can come back anytime and get yourself a peanut . so when they get really used to that we move on to the crows coming back .
now they re used to the sound of the machine and they keep coming back and digging out these peanuts from amongst the pile of coins that s there .
and when they get really happy about this we go ahead and stymie them .
and we move to the third stage where we only give them a coin .
now like most of us who have gotten used to a good thing this really pisses them off .
so they do what they do in nature when they re looking for something they sweep things out of the way with their beak .
and they do that here and that knocks the coins down the slot and when that happens they get a peanut .
and so this goes on for some time .
and this is where we see the difference between crows and other animals .
squirrels for example would show up look for the peanut go away .
come back look for the peanut go away .
they do this maybe half a dozen times before they get bored and then they go off and play in traffic .
crows on the other hand show up and they try and figure it out .
they know that this machine s been messing with them through three different stages of behavior .
they figure it s gotta have more to it .
so they poke at it and peck at it and whatnot .
and eventually some crow gets a bright idea that hey there s lots of coins lying around from the first stage lying around on the ground hops down picks it up drops it in the slot .
and then we re off to the races .
that crow enjoys a temporary monopoly on peanuts until his friends figure out how to do it and then there we go .
so what s significant about this to me isn t that we can train crows to pick up peanuts .
mind you there s million dollars worth of change lost every year but i m not sure i can depend on that roi from crows .
instead i think we should look a little bit larger .
i think that crows can be trained to do other things .
for example why not train them to pick up garbage after stadium events ?
or find expensive components from discarded electronics ?
or maybe do search and rescue ?
the main thing the main point of all this for me is that we can find mutually beneficial systems for these species .
we can find ways to interact with these other species that doesn t involve exterminating them but involves finding an equilibrium with them that s a useful balance .
thanks very much .
i write about food . i write about cooking .
i take it quite seriously but i m here to talk about something that s become very important to me in the last year or two .
it is about food but it s not about cooking per se .
i m going to start with this picture of a beautiful cow .
i m not a vegetarian this is the old nixon line right ?
but i still think that this 
 may be this year s version of this .
now that is only a little bit hyperbolic .
and why do i say it ?
because only once before has the fate of individual people and the fate of all of humanity been so intertwined .
there was the bomb and there s now .
and where we go from here is going to determine not only the quality and the length of our individual lives but whether if we could see the earth a century from now we d recognize it .
it s a holocaust of a different kind and hiding under our desks isn t going to help .
start with the notion that global warming is not only real but dangerous .
since every scientist in the world now believes this and even president bush has seen the light or pretends to we can take this is a given .
then hear this please .
after energy production livestock is the second highest contributor to atmosphere altering gases .
nearly one fifth of all greenhouse gas is generated by livestock production more than transportation .
now you can make all the jokes you want about cow farts but methane is times more poisonous than co and it s not just methane .
livestock is also one of the biggest culprits in land degradation air and water pollution water shortages and loss of biodiversity .
there s more .
like half the antibiotics in this country are not administered to people but to animals .
but lists like this become kind of numbing so let me just say this if you re a progressive if you re driving a prius or you re shopping green or you re looking for organic you should probably be a semi vegetarian .
now i m no more anti cattle than i am anti atom but it s all in the way we use these things .
there s another piece of the puzzle which ann cooper talked about beautifully yesterday and one you already know .
there s no question none that so called lifestyle diseases diabetes heart disease stroke some cancers are diseases that are far more prevalent here than anywhere in the rest of the world .
and that s the direct result of eating a western diet .
our demand for meat dairy and refined carbohydrates the world consumes one billion cans or bottles of coke a day our demand for these things not our need our want drives us to consume way more calories than are good for us .
and those calories are in foods that cause not prevent disease .
now global warming was unforeseen .
we didn t know that pollution did more than cause bad visibility .
maybe a few lung diseases here and there but you know that s not such a big deal .
the current health crisis however is a little more the work of the evil empire .
we were told we were assured that the more meat and dairy and poultry we ate the healthier we d be .
no . overconsumption of animals and of course junk food is the problem along with our paltry consumption of plants .
now there s no time to get into the benefits of eating plants here but the evidence is that plants and i want to make this clear it s not the ingredients in plants it s the plants .
it s not the beta carotene it s the carrot .
the evidence is very clear that plants promote health .
this evidence is overwhelming at this point .
you eat more plants you eat less other stuff you live longer .
not bad .
but back to animals and junk food .
what do they have in common ?
one we don t need either of them for health .
we don t need animal products and we certainly don t need white bread or coke .
two both have been marketed heavily creating unnatural demand .
we re not born craving whoppers or skittles .
three their production has been supported by government agencies at the expense of a more health and earth friendly diet .
now let s imagine a parallel .
let s pretend that our government supported an oil based economy while discouraging more sustainable forms of energy knowing all the while that the result would be pollution war and rising costs .
incredible isn t it ?
yet they do that .
and they do this here . it s the same deal .
the sad thing is when it comes to diet is that even when well intentioned feds try to do right by us they fail .
either they re outvoted by puppets of agribusiness or they are puppets of agribusiness .
so when the usda finally acknowledged that it was plants rather than animals that made people healthy they encouraged us via their overly simplistic food pyramid to eat five servings of fruits and vegetables a day along with more carbs .
what they didn t tell us is that some carbs are better than others and that plants and whole grains should be supplanting eating junk food .
but industry lobbyists would never let that happen .
and guess what ?
half the people who developed the food pyramid have ties to agribusiness .
so instead of substituting plants for animals our swollen appetites simply became larger and the most dangerous aspects of them remained unchanged .
so called low fat diets so called low carb diets these are not solutions .
but with lots of intelligent people focusing on whether food is organic or local or whether we re being nice to animals the most important issues just aren t being addressed .
now don t get me wrong . i like animals and i don t think it s just fine to industrialize their production and to churn them out like they were wrenches .
but there s no way to treat animals well when you re killing billion of them a year .
that s our number . billion .
if you strung all of them chickens cows pigs and lambs to the moon they d go there and back five times there and back .
now my math s a little shaky but this is pretty good and it depends whether a pig is four feet long or five feet long but you get the idea .
that s just the united states .
and with our hyper consumption of those animals producing greenhouse gases and heart disease kindness might just be a bit of a red herring .
let s get the numbers of the animals we re killing for eating down and then we ll worry about being nice to the ones that are left .
another red herring might be exemplified by the word locavore which was just named word of the year by the new oxford american dictionary .
seriously .
and locavore for those of you who don t know is someone who eats only locally grown food 
which is fine if you live in california but for the rest of us it s a bit of a sad joke .
between the official story the food pyramid and the hip locavore vision you have two versions of how to improve our eating .
 .
they both get it wrong though .
the first at least is populist and the second is elitist .
how we got to this place is the history of food in the united states .
and i m going to go through that at least the last hundred years or so very quickly right now .
a hundred years ago guess what ?
everyone was a locavore even new york had pig farms nearby and shipping food all over the place was a ridiculous notion .
every family had a cook usually a mom .
and those moms bought and prepared food .
it was like your romantic vision of europe .
margarine didn t exist .
in fact when margarine was invented several states passed laws declaring that it had to be dyed pink so we d all know that it was a fake .
there was no snack food and until the s until clarence birdseye came along there was no frozen food .
there were no restaurant chains .
there were neighborhood restaurants run by local people but none of them would think to open another one .
eating ethnic was unheard of unless you were ethnic .
and fancy food was entirely french .
as an aside those of you who remember dan aykroyd in the s doing julia child imitations can see where he got the idea of stabbing himself from this fabulous slide .
back in those days before even julia back in those days there was no philosophy of food .
you just ate .
you didn t claim to be anything .
there was no marketing . there were no national brands .
vitamins had not been invented .
there were no health claims at least not federally sanctioned ones .
fats carbs proteins they weren t bad or good they were food .
you ate food .
hardly anything contained more than one ingredient because it was an ingredient .
the cornflake hadn t been invented .
the pop tart the pringle cheez whiz none of that stuff .
goldfish swam .
it s hard to imagine . people grew food and they ate food .
and again everyone ate local .
in new york an orange was a common christmas present because it came all the way from florida .
from the s on road systems expanded trucks took the place of railroads fresh food began to travel more .
oranges became common in new york .
the south and west became agricultural hubs and in other parts of the country suburbs took over farmland .
the effects of this are well known . they are everywhere .
and the death of family farms is part of this puzzle as is almost everything from the demise of the real community to the challenge of finding a good tomato even in summer .
eventually california produced too much food to ship fresh so it became critical to market canned and frozen foods .
thus arrived convenience .
it was sold to proto feminist housewives as a way to cut down on housework .
now i know everybody over the age of like their mouths are watering at this point .
if we had a slide of salisbury steak even more so right ?
but this may have cut down on housework but it cut down on the variety of food we ate as well .
many of us grew up never eating a fresh vegetable except the occasional raw carrot or maybe an odd lettuce salad .
i for one and i m not kidding didn t eat real spinach or broccoli till i was . who needed it though ? meat was everywhere .
what could be easier more filling or healthier for your family than broiling a steak ?
but by then cattle were already raised unnaturally .
rather than spending their lives eating grass for which their stomachs were designed they were forced to eat soy and corn .
they have trouble digesting those grains of course but that wasn t a problem for producers .
new drugs kept them healthy .
well they kept them alive .
healthy was another story .
thanks to farm subsidies the fine collaboration between agribusiness and congress soy corn and cattle became king .
and chicken soon joined them on the throne .
it was during this period that the cycle of dietary and planetary destruction began the thing we re only realizing just now .
listen to this between and the world s population doubled . meat consumption increased five fold .
now someone had to eat all that stuff so we got fast food .
and this took care of the situation resoundingly .
home cooking remained the norm but its quality was down the tubes .
there were fewer meals with home cooked breads desserts and soups because all of them could be bought at any store .
not that they were any good but they were there .
most moms cooked like mine a piece of broiled meat a quickly made salad with bottled dressing canned soup canned fruit salad .
maybe baked or mashed potatoes or perhaps the stupidest food ever minute rice .
for dessert store bought ice cream or cookies .
my mom is not here so i can say this now .
this kind of cooking drove me to learn how to cook for myself .
it wasn t all bad .
by the s forward thinking people began to recognize the value of local ingredients .
we tended gardens we became interested in organic food we knew or we were vegetarians .
we weren t all hippies either .
some of us were eating in good restaurants and learning how to cook well .
meanwhile food production had become industrial . industrial .
perhaps because it was being produced rationally as if it were plastic food gained magical or poisonous powers or both .
many people became fat phobic .
others worshiped broccoli as if it were god like .
but mostly they didn t eat broccoli .
instead they were sold on yogurt yogurt being almost as good as broccoli .
except in reality the way the industry sold yogurt was to convert it to something much more akin to ice cream .
similarly let s look at a granola bar .
you think that that might be healthy food but in fact if you look at the ingredient list it s closer in form to a snickers than it is to oatmeal .
sadly it was at this time that the family dinner was put in a coma if not actually killed 
the beginning of the heyday of value added food which contained as many soy and corn products as could be crammed into it .
think of the frozen chicken nugget .
the chicken is fed corn and then its meat is ground up and mixed with more corn products to add bulk and binder and then it s fried in corn oil .
all you do is nuke it . what could be better ?
and zapped horribly pathetically .
by the s home cooking was in such a sad state that the high fat and spice contents of foods like mcnuggets and hot pockets and we all have our favorites actually made this stuff more appealing than the bland things that people were serving at home .
at the same time masses of women were entering the workforce and cooking simply wasn t important enough for men to share the burden .
so now you ve got your pizza nights you ve got your microwave nights you ve got your grazing nights you ve got your fend for yourself nights and so on .
leading the way what s leading the way ?
meat junk food cheese 
the very stuff that will kill you .
so now we clamor for organic food .
that s good .
and as evidence that things can actually change you can now find organic food in supermarkets and even in fast food outlets .
but organic food isn t the answer either at least not the way it s currently defined .
let me pose you a question . can farm raised salmon be organic when its feed has nothing to do with its natural diet even if the feed itself is supposedly organic and the fish themselves are packed tightly in pens swimming in their own filth ?
and if that salmon s from chile and it s killed down there and then flown miles whatever dumping how much carbon into the atmosphere ?
i don t know .
packed in styrofoam of course before landing somewhere in the united states and then being trucked a few hundred more miles .
this may be organic in letter but it s surely not organic in spirit .
now here is where we all meet .
the locavores the organivores the vegetarians the vegans the gourmets and those of us who are just plain interested in good food .
even though we ve come to this from different points we all have to act on our knowledge to change the way that everyone thinks about food . we need to start acting .
and this is not only an issue of social justice as ann cooper said and of course she s completely right but it s also one of global survival .
which bring me full circle and points directly to the core issue the overproduction and overconsumption of meat and junk food .
as i said percent of greenhouse gases are attributed to livestock production .
how much livestock do you need to produce this ?
 percent of the agricultural land on earth percent of the earth s land surface is directly or indirectly devoted to raising the animals we ll eat .
and this amount is predicted to double in the next years or so .
and if the numbers coming in from china are anything like what they look like now it s not going to be years .
there is no good reason for eating as much meat as we do .
and i say this as a man who has eaten a fair share of corned beef in his life .
the most common argument is that we need nutrients even though we eat on average twice as much protein as even the industry obsessed usda recommends .
but listen experts who are serious about disease reduction recommend that adults eat just over half a pound of meat per week .
what do you think we eat per day ? half a pound .
but don t we need meat to be big and strong ?
isn t meat eating essential to health ?
won t a diet heavy in fruit and vegetables turn us into godless sissy liberals ?
some of us might think that would be a good thing .
but no even if we were all steroid filled football players the answer is no .
in fact there s no diet on earth that meets basic nutritional needs that won t promote growth 
and many will make you much healthier than ours does .
we don t eat animal products for sufficient nutrition we eat them to have an odd form of malnutrition and it s killing us .
to suggest that in the interests of personal and human health americans eat percent less meat it s not enough of a cut but it s a start .
it would seem absurd but that s exactly what should happen 
and what progressive people forward thinking people should be doing and advocating 
along with the corresponding increase in the consumption of plants .
i ve been writing about food more or less omnivorously one might say indiscriminately for about years .
during that time i ve eaten and recommended eating just about everything .
i ll never stop eating animals i m sure but i do think that for the benefit of everyone the time has come to stop raising them industrially
and stop eating them thoughtlessly .
ann cooper s right .
the usda is not our ally here .
we have to take matters into our own hands not only by advocating for a better diet for everyone and that s the hard part but by improving our own .
and that happens to be quite easy .
less meat less junk more plants .
it s a simple formula eat food .
eat real food .
we can continue to enjoy our food and we continue to eat well and we can eat even better .
we can continue the search for the ingredients we love and we can continue to spin yarns about our favorite meals .
we ll reduce not only calories but our carbon footprint .
we can make food more important not less and save ourselves by doing so .
we have to choose that path .
thank you .
the first question is this . our country has two exploration programs .
one is nasa with a mission to explore the great beyond to explore the heavens which we all want to go to if we re lucky .
and you can see we have sputnik and we have saturn and we have other manifestations of space exploration .
well there s also another program in another agency within our government in ocean exploration .
it s in noaa the national oceanic and atmospheric administration .
and my question is this why are we ignoring the oceans ? 
here s the reason or not the reason but here s why i ask that question .
if you compare nasa s annual budget to explore the heavens that one year budget would fund noaa s budget to explore the oceans for years .
why ? why are we looking up ? is it because it s heaven ?
and hell is down here ? is it a cultural issue ?
why are people afraid of the ocean ?
or do they just assume the ocean is just a dark gloomy place that has nothing to offer ?
i m going to take you on a minute trip on percent of the planet so buckle up .
ok . and what we re going to do is we re going to immerse ourselves in my world .
and what i m going to try i hope i make the following points .
i m going to make it right now in case i forget .
everything i m going to present to you was not in my textbooks when i went to school .
and most of all it was not even in my college textbooks .
i m a geophysicist and all my earth science books when i was a student i had to give the wrong answer to get an a .
we used to ridicule continental drift . it was something we laughed at .
we learned of marshall kay s geosynclinal cycle which is a bunch of crap .
in today s context it was a bunch of crap but it was the law of geology vertical tectonics .
all the things we re going to walk through in our explorations and discoveries of the oceans were mostly discoveries made by accident . mostly discoveries made by accident .
we were looking for something and found something else .
and everything we re going to talk about represents a one tenth of one percent glimpse because that s all we ve seen .
i have a characterization .
this is a characterization of what it would look like if you could remove the water .
it gives you the false impression it s a map . it is not a map .
in fact i have another version at my office and i ask people why are there mountains here on this area here but there are none over here ? and they go well gee 
i don t know saying is it a fracture zone ? is it a hot spot ? 
no no that s the only place a ship s been .
most of the southern hemisphere is unexplored .
we had more exploration ships down there during captain cook s time than now . it s amazing .
all right . so we re going to immerse ourselves in the percent of the planet because you know it s really naive to think that the easter bunny put all the resources on the continents .
you know it s just ludicrous .
we are always constantly playing the zero sum game .
you know we re going to do this we re going to take it away from something else .
i believe in just enriching the economy .
and we re leaving so much on the table percent of the planet .
and as i will point out later in the presentation percent of the united states of america lies beneath the sea .
 percent of our country that we own have all legal jurisdiction have all rights to do whatever we want lies beneath the sea and we have better maps of mars than that percent .
why ? ok . now i began my explorations the hard way .
back then actually my first expedition was when i was years old . it was years ago .
do the math i m . and i went out to sea on a scripps ship and we almost got sunk by a giant rogue wave and i was too young to be you know i thought it was great !
i was a body surfer and i thought wow that was an incredible wave ! 
and we almost sank the ship but i became enraptured
with mounting expeditions . and over the last years i ve done about i keep doing them expeditions .
but in the early days the only way i could get to the bottom was to crawl into a submarine a very small submarine and go down to the bottom .
i dove in a whole series of different deep diving submersibles .
alvin and sea cliff and cyana and all the major deep submersibles we have which are about eight .
in fact on a good day we might have four or five human beings at the average depth of the earth maybe four or five human beings out of whatever billions we ve got going .
and so it s very difficult to get there if you do it physically .
but i was enraptured and in my graduate years was the dawn of plate tectonics . and we realized
that the greatest mountain range on earth lies beneath the sea .
the mid ocean ridge runs around like the seam on a baseball .
this is on a mercator projection .
but if you were to put it on an equal area projection you d see that the mid ocean ridge covers percent of the earth s total surface area .
almost a quarter of our planet is a single mountain range and we didn t enter it until after neil armstrong and buzz aldrin went to the moon .
so we went to the moon played golf up there before we went to the largest feature on our own planet .
and our interest in this mountain range as earth scientists in those days was not only because of its tremendous size dominating the planet but the role it plays in the genesis of the earth s outer skin .
because it s along the axis of the mid ocean ridge where the great crustal plates are separating .
and like a living organism you tear it open it bleeds its molten blood rises up to heal that wound from the asthenosphere hardens forms new tissue and moves laterally .
we went down into the rift valley .
this is all accurate except for one thing it s pitch black .
it s absolutely pitch black because photons cannot reach the average depth of the ocean which is feet . in the rift valley it s feet .
most of our planet does not feel the warmth of the sun .
most of our planet is in eternal darkness .
and for that reason you do not have photosynthesis in the deep sea .
and with the absence of photosynthesis you have no plant life and as a result you have very little animal life living in this underworld .
or so we thought . and so in our initial explorations we were totally focused on exploring the boundary of creation 
looking at the volcanic features running along that entire miles . running along this entire miles
are tens of thousands of active volcanoes .
tens of thousands of active volcanoes .
there are more active volcanoes beneath the sea than on land by two orders of magnitude .
so it s a phenomenally active region it s not just a dark boring place . it s a very alive place .
and it s then being ripped open .
but we were dealing with a particular scientific issue back then .
we couldn t understand why you had a mountain under tension .
in plate tectonic theory we knew that if you had plates collide it made sense they would crush into one another you would thicken the crust you d uplift it .
that s why you get you know you get seashells up on mount everest .
it s not a flood it was pushed up there .
we understood mountains under compression but we could not understand why we had a mountain under tension .
it should not be . until one of my colleagues said it looks to me like a thermal blister and the mid ocean ridge must be a cooling curve . we said let s go find out . 
we punched a bunch of heat probes . everything made sense except at the axis there was missing heat . it was missing heat .
it was hot . it wasn t hot enough .
so we came up with multiple hypotheses there s little green people down there taking it there s all sorts of things going on .
but the only logical explanation was that there were hot springs .
so there must be underwater hot springs .
we mounted an expedition to look for the missing heat .
and so we went along this mountain range in an area along galapagos rift and did we find the missing heat .
it was amazing . these giant chimneys huge giant chimneys .
we went up to them with our submersible .
we wanted to get a temperature probe we stuck it in there looked at it it pegged off scale .
the pilot made this great observation that s hot . 
and then we realized our probe was made out of the same stuff it could have melted . but it turns out the exiting temperature was degrees f hot enough to melt lead .
this is what a real one looks like on the juan de fuca ridge .
what you re looking at is an incredible pipe organ of chemicals coming out of the ocean .
everything you see in this picture is commercial grade copper lead silver zinc and gold .
so the easter bunny has put things in the ocean floor and you have massive heavy metal deposits that we re making in this mountain range .
we re making huge discoveries of large commercial grade ore along this mountain range but it was dwarfed by what we discovered .
we discovered a profusion of life in a world that it should not exist in . giant tube worms feet tall .
i remember having to use vodka my own vodka to pickle it because we don t carry formaldehyde .
we went and found these incredible clam beds sitting on the barren rock . large clams and when we opened them they didn t look like a clam .
and when we cut them open they didn t have the anatomy of a clam .
no mouth no gut no digestive system .
their bodies had been totally taken over by another organism a bacterium that had figured out how to replicate photosynthesis in the dark through a process we now call chemosynthesis .
none of it in our textbooks . none of this in our textbooks .
we did not know about this life system .
we were not predicting it .
we stumbled on it looking for some missing heat .
so we wanted to accelerate this process .
we wanted to get away from this silly trip up and down on a submarine average depth of the ocean feet two and half hours to get to work in the morning two and half hours to get to home . five hour commute to work .
three hours of bottom time average distance traveled one mile .
on a mile mountain range . great job security but not the way to go .
so i began designing a new technology of telepresence using robotic systems to replicate myself so i wouldn t have to cycle my vehicle system .
we began to introduce that in our explorations and we continued to make phenomenal discoveries with our new robotic technologies . again looking for something else moving from one part of the mid ocean ridge to another .
the scientists were off watch and they came across incredible life forms .
they came across new creatures they had not seen before .
but more importantly they discovered edifices down there that they did not understand .
that did not make sense . they were not above a magma chamber .
they shouldn t be there . and we called it lost city .
and lost city was characterized by these incredible limestone formations and upside down pools . look at that .
how do you do that ? that s water upside down .
we went in underneath and tapped it and we found that it had the ph of drano .
the ph of and yet it had chemosynthetic bacteria living in it and at this extreme environment .
and the hydrothermal vents were in an acidic environment .
all the way at the other end in an alkaline environment at a ph of life existed .
so life was much more creative than we had ever thought .
again discovered by accident . just two years ago working off santorini where people are sunning themselves on the beach unbeknownst to them in the caldera nearby we found phenomenal hydrothermal vent systems and more life systems .
this was two miles from where people go to sunbathe and they were oblivious to the existence of this system .
again you know we stop at the water s edge .
recently diving off in the gulf of mexico finding pools of water this time not upside down right side up .
