thank you so much chris . and it s truly a great honor to have the opportunity to come to this stage twice i m extremely grateful .
i have been blown away by this conference and i want to thank all of you for the many nice comments about what i had to say the other night . and i say that sincerely 
i need that . put yourselves in my position .
i flew on air force two for eight years .
now i have to take off my shoes or boots to get on an airplane !
i ll tell you one quick story to illustrate what that s been like for me .
it s a true story every bit of this is true .
soon after tipper and i left the white house we were driving from our home in nashville to a little farm we have miles east of nashville . driving ourselves .
i know it sounds like a little thing to you but i looked in the rear view mirror and all of a sudden it just hit me .
there was no motorcade back there .
you ve heard of phantom limb pain ? this was a rented ford taurus . it was dinnertime and we started looking for a place to eat .
we were on i . we got to exit lebanon tennessee .
we got off the exit we found a shoney s restaurant .
low cost family restaurant chain for those of you who don t know it .
we went in and sat down at the booth and the waitress came over made a big commotion over tipper . she took our order and then went to the couple in the booth next to us 
and she lowered her voice so much i had to really strain to hear what she was saying .
and she said yes that s former vice president al gore and his wife tipper . 
and the man said he s come down a long way hasn t he ? there s been kind of a series of epiphanies .
the very next day continuing the totally true story i got on a g v to fly to africa to make a speech in nigeria in the city of lagos on the topic of energy .
and i began the speech by telling them the story of what had just happened the day before in nashville .
and i told it pretty much the same way i ve just shared it with you 
tipper and i were driving ourselves shoney s low cost family restaurant chain what the man said they laughed .
i gave my speech then went back out to the airport to fly back home .
i fell asleep on the plane until during the middle of the night we landed on the azores islands for refueling .
i woke up they opened the door i went out to get some fresh air and i looked and there was a man running across the runway .
and he was waving a piece of paper and he was yelling call washington ! call washington ! 
and i thought to myself in the middle of the night in the middle of the atlantic what in the world could be wrong in washington ?
then i remembered it could be a bunch of things .
but what it turned out to be was that my staff was extremely upset because one of the wire services in nigeria had already written a story about my speech 
one of them had me in a big white chef s hat tipper was saying one more burger with fries ! 
three days later i got a nice long handwritten letter from my friend and partner and colleague bill clinton saying congratulations on the new restaurant al ! 
we like to celebrate each other s successes in life .
i was going to talk about information ecology .
but i was thinking that since i plan to make a lifelong habit of coming back to ted that maybe i could talk about that another time . chris anderson it s a deal !
now the slide show . i update the slide show every time i give it .
i add new images because i learn more about it every time i give it .
it s like beach combing you know ? every time the tide comes in and out you find some more shells .
just in the last two days we got the new temperature records in january .
this is just for the united states of america . historical average for januarys is degrees last month was . degrees .
now i know that you wanted some more bad news about the environment i m kidding . but these are the recapitulation slides and then i m going to go into new material about what you can do .
but i wanted to elaborate on a couple of these .
first of all this is where we re projected to go with the u .s . contribution to global warming under business as usual . efficiency in end use electricity and end use of all energy is the low hanging fruit . efficiency and conservation it s not a cost it s a profit . the sign is wrong .
it s not negative it s positive . these are investments that pay for themselves .
but they are also very effective in deflecting our path .
cars and trucks i talked about that in the slideshow but i want you to put it in perspective .
it s an easy visible target of concern and it should be but there is more global warming pollution that comes from buildings than from cars and trucks .
cars and trucks are very significant and we have the lowest standards in the world . and so we should address that . but it s part of the puzzle .
other transportation efficiency is as important as cars and trucks .
carbon capture and sequestration that s what ccs stands for is likely to become the killer app that will enable us to continue to use fossil fuels in a way that is safe .
not quite there yet .
ok . now what can you do ? reduce emissions in your home .
most of these expenditures are also profitable .
insulation better design . buy green electricity where you can .
i mentioned automobiles buy a hybrid . use light rail .
figure out some of the other options that are much better . it s important .
be a green consumer . you have choices with everything you buy between things that have a harsh effect or a much less harsh effect on the global climate crisis .
consider this make a decision to live a carbon neutral life .
those of you who are good at branding i d love to get your advice and help on how to say this in a way that connects with the most people .
it is easier than you think . it really is .
a lot of us in here have made that decision and it is really pretty easy .
it means reduce your carbon dioxide emissions with the full range of choices that you make and then purchase or acquire offsets for the remainder that you have not completely reduced . and what it means is elaborated at climatecrisis .net .
there is a carbon calculator . participant productions convened with my active involvement the leading software writers in the world on this arcane science of carbon calculation to construct a consumer friendly carbon calculator .
you can very precisely calculate what your co emissions are and then you will be given options to reduce .
and by the time the movie comes out in may this will be updated to . and we will have click through purchases of offsets .
next consider making your business carbon neutral . again some of us have done that and it s not as hard as you think . integrate climate solutions into all of your innovations whether you are from the technology or entertainment or design and architecture community .
invest sustainably . majora mentioned this .
listen if you have invested money with managers who you compensate on the basis of their annual performance don t ever again complain about quarterly report ceo management .
over time people do what you pay them to do . and if they judge how much they re going to get paid on your capital that they ve invested based on the short term returns you re going to get short term decisions .
a lot more to be said about that .
become a catalyst of change . teach others learn about it talk about it .
the movie is a movie version of the slideshow i gave two nights ago except it s a lot more entertaining . and it comes out in may .
many of you here have the opportunity to ensure that a lot of people see it .
consider sending somebody to nashville . pick well .
and i am personally going to train people to give this slideshow re purposed with some of the personal stories obviously replaced with a generic approach and it s not just the slides it s what they mean . and it s how they link together .
and so i m going to be conducting a course this summer for a group of people that are nominated by different folks to come and then give it en masse in communities all across the country 
and we re going to update the slideshow for all of them every single week to keep it right on the cutting edge .
working with larry lessig it will be somewhere in that process posted with tools and limited use copyrights so that young people can remix it and do it in their own way .
where did anybody get the idea that you ought to stay arm s length from politics ?
support the idea of capping carbon dioxide emissions global warming pollution and trading it . here s why as long as the united states is out of the world system it s not a closed system .
once it becomes a closed system with u .s . participation then everybody who s on a board of directors how many people here serve on the board of directors of a corporation ?
once it s a closed system you will have legal liability if you do not urge your ceo to get the maximum income from reducing and trading the carbon emissions that can be avoided . the market will work to solve this problem if we can accomplish this .
help with the mass persuasion campaign that will start this spring .
we have to change the minds of the american people . because presently the politicians do not have permission to do what needs to be done .
and in our modern country the role of logic and reason no longer includes mediating between wealth and power the way it once did .
it s now repetition of short hot button second second television ads .
we have to buy a lot of those ads .
let s re brand global warming as many of you have suggested .
i like climate crisis instead of climate collapse but again those of you who are good at branding i need your help on this .
somebody said the test we re facing now a scientist told me is whether the combination of an opposable thumb and a neocortex is a viable combination .
that s really true . i said the other night and i ll repeat now this is not a political issue .
again the republicans here this shouldn t be partisan .
you have more influence than some of us who are democrats do .
this is an opportunity . not just this but connected to the ideas that are here to bring more coherence to them .
we are one .
thank you very much i appreciate it .
in terms of invention i d like to tell you the tale of one of my favorite projects .
i think it s one of the most exciting that i m working on but i think it s also the simplest .
it s a project that has the potential to make a huge impact around the world .
it addresses one of the biggest health issues on the planet the number one cause of death in children under five .
which is . . . ? water borne diseases ? diarrhea ? malnutrition ?
no . it s breathing the smoke from indoor cooking fires acute respiratory infections caused by this . can you believe that ?
i find this shocking and somewhat appalling .
can t we make cleaner burning cooking fuels ?
can t we make better stoves ?
how is it that this can lead to over two million deaths every year ?
i know bill joy was talking to you about the wonders of carbon nanotubes 
so i m going to talk to you about the wonders of carbon macro tubes which is charcoal .
so this is a picture of rural haiti . haiti is now percent deforested .
you ll see scenes like this all over the island .
it leads to all sorts of environmental problems and problems that affect people throughout the nation .
a couple years ago there was severe flooding that led to thousands of deaths that s directly attributable to the fact that there are no trees on the hills to stabilize the soil .
so the rains come they go down the rivers and the flooding happens .
now one of the reasons why there are so few trees is this people need to cook and they harvest wood and they make charcoal in order to do it .
it s not that people are ignorant to the environmental damage . they know perfectly well but they have no other choice .
fossil fuels are not available and solar energy doesn t cook the way that they like their food prepared .
and so this is what they do .
you ll find families like this who go out into the forest to find a tree cut it down and make charcoal out of it .
so not surprisingly there s a lot of effort that s been done to look at alternative cooking fuels .
about four years ago i took a team of students down to haiti and we worked with peace corps volunteers there .
this is one such volunteer
and this is a device that he had built in the village where he worked .
and the idea was that you could take waste paper you could compress it and make briquettes that could be used for fuel .
but this device was very slow .
so our engineering students went to work on it and with some very simple changes they were able to triple the throughput of this device .
so you could imagine they were very excited about it .
and they took the briquettes back to mit so that they could test them .
and one of the things that they found was they didn t burn .
so it was a little discouraging to the students .
and in fact if you look closely right here you can see it says us peace corps . 
as it turns out there actually wasn t any waste paper in this village .
and while it was a good use of government paperwork for this volunteer to bring it back with him to his village it was kilometers away . and so we thought perhaps there might be a better way to come up with an alternative cooking fuel .
what we wanted to do is we wanted to make a fuel that used something that was readily available on the local level .
you see these all over haiti as well . they re small scale sugar mills . and the waste product from them
after you extract the juice from the sugarcane is called bagasse . it has no other use .
it has no nutritional value so they don t feed it to the animals .
it just sits in a pile near the sugar mill until eventually they burn it .
what we wanted to do was we wanted to find a way to harness this waste resource and turn it into a fuel that would be something that people could easily cook with something like charcoal .
so over the next couple of years 
students and i worked to develop a process . so you start with the bagasse and then you take a very simple kiln that you can make out of a waste fifty five gallon oil drum .
after some time after setting it on fire you seal it to restrict the oxygen that goes into the kiln and then you end up with this carbonized material here .
however you can t burn this . it s too fine and it burns too quickly to be useful for cooking .
so we had to try to find a way to form it into useful briquettes .
and conveniently one of my students was from ghana 
and he remembered a dish his mom used to make for him called kokonte which is a very sticky porridge made out of the cassava root .
and so what we did was we looked and we found that cassava is indeed grown in haiti under the name of manioc . 
in fact it s grown all over the world yucca tapioca manioc cassava it s all the same thing a very starchy root vegetable .
and you can make a very thick sticky porridge out of it which you can use to bind together the charcoal briquettes .
so we did this . we went down to haiti .
these are the graduates of the first ecole de charbon or charcoal institute . and these that s right . so i m actually an instructor at mit as well as cit .
and these are the briquettes that we made .
now i m going to take you to a different continent . this is india
and this is the most commonly used cooking fuel in india . it s cow dung .
and more than in haiti this produces really smoky fires 
and this is where you see the health impacts of cooking with cow dung and biomass as a fuel .
kids and women are especially affected by it because they re the ones who are around the cooking fires .
so we wanted to see if we could introduce this charcoal making technology there .
well unfortunately they didn t have sugarcane and they didn t have cassava but that didn t stop us .
what we did was we found what were the locally available sources of biomass .
and there was wheat straw and there was rice straw in this area .
and what we could use as a binder was actually small amounts of cow manure which they used ordinarily for their fuel .
and we did side by side tests and here you can see the charcoal briquettes and here the cow dung .
and you can see that it s a lot cleaner burning of a cooking fuel . and in fact it heats the water a lot more quickly .
and so we were very happy thus far . but one of the things that we found was when we did side by side comparisons with wood charcoal it didn t burn as long .
and the briquettes crumbled a little bit and we lost energy as they fell apart as they were cooking .
so we wanted to try to find a way to make a stronger briquette so that we could compete with wood charcoal in the markets in haiti .
so we went back to mit we took out the instron machine
and we figured out what sort of forces you needed in order to compress a briquette to the level that you actually are getting improved performance out of it ?
and at the same time that we had students in the lab looking at this we also had community partners in haiti working to develop the process to improve it and make it more accessible to people in the villages there .
and after some time we developed a low cost press that allows you to produce charcoal which actually now burns not only actually it burns longer cleaner than wood charcoal .
so now we re in a situation where we have a product which is actually better than what you can buy in haiti in the marketplace which is a very wonderful place to be .
in haiti alone about million trees are cut down every year .
there s a possibility of this being implemented and saving a good portion of those .
in addition the revenue generated from that charcoal is million dollars .
that s an awful lot for a country like haiti with a population of eight million and an average income of less than dollars .
so this is where we re also moving ahead with our charcoal project .
and one of the things that i think is also interesting is i have a friend up at uc berkeley who s been doing risk analysis .
and he s looked at the problem of the health impacts of burning wood versus charcoal .
and he s found that worldwide you could prevent a million deaths switching from wood to charcoal as a cooking fuel . that s remarkable but up until now there weren t ways to do it without cutting down trees .
but now we have a way that s using an agricultural waste material to create a cooking fuel .
one of the really exciting things though is something that came out of the trip that i took to ghana just last month .
and i think it s the coolest thing and it s even lower tech than what you just saw if you can imagine such a thing . here it is . so what is this ?
this is corncobs turned into charcoal .
and the beauty of this is that you don t need to form briquettes it comes ready made .
this is my laptop right here .
and actually like nick i brought samples .
so we can pass these around .
they re fully functional field tested ready to roll out . and i think one of the things
which is also remarkable about this technology is that the technology transfer is so easy .
compared to the sugarcane charcoal where we have to teach people how to form it into briquettes and you have the extra step of cooking the binder this comes pre briquetted .
and this is about the most exciting thing in my life right now which is perhaps a sad commentary on my life .
but once you see it like you guys in the front row all right yeah ok .
so anyway here it is . and this is i think a perfect example of what robert wright was talking about in those non zero sum things .
so not only do you have health benefits you have environmental benefits .
but this is one of the incredibly rare situations where you also have economic benefits .
people can make their own cooking fuel from waste products .
they can generate income from this .
they can save the money that they were going to spend on charcoal
and they can produce excess and sell it in the market to people who aren t making their own .
it s really rare that you don t have trade offs between health and economics or environment and economics .
so this is a project that i just find extremely exciting and i m really looking forward to see where it takes us .
so when we talk about now the future we will create one of the things that i think is necessary is to have a very clear vision of the world that we live in .
and now i don t actually mean the world that we live in . i mean the world where women spend two to three hours everyday grinding grain for their families to eat .
i mean the world where advanced building materials means cement roofing tiles that are made by hand 
and where when you work hours a day you re still only earning dollars in a month .
i mean the world where women and children spend billion hours a year fetching water .
that s as if the entire workforce of the state of california worked full time for a year doing nothing but fetching water .
it s a place where for example if this were india in this room only three of us would have a car .
if this were afghanistan only one person in this room would know how the use the internet .
if this were zambia of you would be farmers of you would have aids or hiv .
and more than half of you would be living on less than a dollar a day .
these are the issues that we need to come up with solutions for .
these are the issues that we need to be training our engineers our designers our business people our entrepreneurs to be facing .
these are the solutions that we need to find .
i have a few areas that i believe are especially important that we address .
one of them is creating technologies to promote micro finance and micro enterprise so that people who are living below the poverty line can find a way to move out and that they re not doing it using the same traditional basket making poultry rearing etc .
but there are new technologies and new products that they can make on a small scale .
is that we need to create technologies for poor farmers to add value to their own crops .
and we need to rethink our development strategies so that we re not promoting educational campaigns to get them to stop being farmers but rather to stop being poor farmers .
and we need to think about how we can do that effectively .
we need to work with the people in these communities and give them the resources and the tools that they need to solve their own problems . that s the best way to do it .
we shouldn t be doing it from outside .
so we need to create this future and we need to start doing it now .
thank you .
chris anderson thank you incredible . stay here . tell us just while we see if someone has a question just tell us about one of the other things that you ve worked on .
amy smith some of the other things we re working on are ways to do low cost water quality testing so that communities can maintain their own water systems know when they re working know when they treat them etc .
we re also looking at low cost water treatment systems .
one of the really exciting things is looking at solar water disinfection and improving the ability to be able to do that .
ca what s the bottleneck preventing this stuff getting from scale ?
do you need to find entrepreneurs or venture capitalists 
or what do you need to take what you ve got and get it to scale ?
as i think it s large numbers of people moving it forward .
it s a difficult thing it s a marketplace which is very fragmented and a consumer population with no income .
so you can t use the same models that you use in the united states for making things move forward .
and we re a pretty small staff which is me .
so you know i do what i can with the students .
we have students a year go out into the field and try to implement this and move it forward .
the other thing is you have to do things with a long time frame as you know you can t expect to get something done in a year or two years you have to be looking five or years ahead .
but i think with the vision to do that we can move forward .
a public dewey long ago observed is constituted through discussion and debate .
if we are to call the tyranny of assumptions into question and avoid doxa the realm of the unquestioned then we must be willing to subject our own assumptions to debate and discussion .
it is in this spirit that i join into a discussion of one of the critical issues of our time namely how to mobilize different forms of capital for the project of state building .
to put the assumptions very clearly capitalism after years has become acceptable and so has democracy .
if we looked in the world of and looked at the map of capitalist economies and democratic polities they were the rare exception not the norm .
the question now however is both about which form of capitalism and which type of democratic participation .
but we must acknowledge that this moment has brought about a rare consensus of assumptions .
and that provides the ground for a type of action because consensus of each moment allows us to act .
and it is necessary no matter how fragile or how provisional our consensus to be able to move forward .
but the majority of the world neither benefits from capitalism nor from democratic systems .
most of the globe experiences the state as repressive as an organization that is concerned about denial of rights about denial of justice rather than provision of it .
and in terms of experience of capitalism there are two aspects that the rest of the globe experiences .
first extractive industry .
blood diamonds smuggled emeralds timber that is cut right from under the poorest .
second is technical assistance .
and technical assistance might shock you but it s the worst form of today of the ugly face of the developed world to the developing countries .
tens of billions of dollars are supposedly spent on building capacity with people who are paid up to dollars a day who are incapable of thinking creatively or organically .
next assumption and of course the events of july i express my deep sympathy and before that september have reminded us we do not live in three different worlds .
we live in one world .
but that s easily said .
but we are not dealing with the implications of the one world that we are living in .
and that is that if we want to have one world this one world cannot be based on huge pockets of exclusion and then inclusion for some .
we must now finally come to think about the premises of a truly global world in relationship to the regime of rights and responsibilities and accountabilities that are truly global in scope .
otherwise we will be missing this open moment in history where we have a consensus on both the form of politics and the form of economics .
what is one of these organizations to pick ?
we have three critical terms economy civil society and the state .
i will not deal with those first two except to say that uncritical transfer of assumptions from one context to another can only make for disaster .
economics taught in most of the elite universities are practically useless in my context .
my country is dominated by drug economy and a mafia .
textbook economics does not work in my context and i have very few recommendations from anybody as to how to put together a legal economy .
the poverty of our knowledge must become the first basis of moving forward and not imposition of the framework that works on the basis of mathematical modeling for which i have enormous respect .
my colleagues at johns hopkins were among the best .
second instead of debating endlessly about what is the structure of the state why don t we simplify and say what are a series of functions that the state in the st century must perform ?
clare lockhart and i are writing a book on this 
we hope to share that much widely with and third is that we could actually construct an index to measure comparatively how well these functions that we would agree on are being performed in different places .
so what are these functions ?
we propose .
i won t elaborate .
i hope the questions will give me an opportunity .
this is a feasible goal basically because contrary to widespread assumption i would argue that we know how to do this .
who would have imagined that germany would be either united or democratic today if you looked at it from the perspective of oxford of ?
but people at oxford prepared for a democratic germany and engaged in planning .
and there are lots of other examples .
now in order to do this and this brings this group we have to rethink the notion of capital .
the least important form of capital in this project is financial capital money .
money is not capital in most of the developing countries .
it s just cash .
because it lacks the institutional organizational managerial forms to turn it into capital .
and what is required is a combination of physical capital institutional capital human capital and security of course is critical but so is information .
now the issue that should concern us here and that s the challenge that i would like to pose to this group is again it takes years in your countries to produce somebody with a b .s . degree .
it takes years to produce somebody with a ph .d .
the first challenge is to rethink fundamentally the issue of the time .
do we need to repeat the modalities that we have inherited ?
our educational systems are inherited from the th century .
what is it that we need to do fundamentally to re engage in a project that capital formation is rapid ?
the absolute majority of the world s population are below and they are growing larger and faster .
they need different ways of being approached 
different ways of being enfranchised 
different ways of being skilled .
and that s the first thing .
second is you re problem solvers but you re not engaging your global responsibility .
you ve stayed away from the problems of corruption .
you only want clean environments in which to function .
but if you don t think through the problems of corruption who will ?
you stay away from design for development .
you re great designers but your designs are selfish .
it s for your own immediate use .
the world in which i operate operates with designs regarding roads or dams or provision of electricity that have not been revisited in years .
this is not right . it requires thinking .
but particularly what we need more than anything else from this group is your imagination to be brought to bear on problems the way a meme is supposed to work .
as the work on paradigms long time ago showed thomas kuhn s work it s in the intersection of ideas that new developments true breakthroughs occur .
and i hope that this group would be able to deal with the issue of state and development and the empowerment of the majority of the world s poor through this means .
thank you .
chris anderson so ashraf until recently you were the finance minister of afghanistan a country right at the middle of much of the world s agenda .
is the country gonna make it ?
will democracy flourish ? what scares you most ?
ashraf ghani what scares me most is is you 
lack of your engagement .
you asked me . you know i always give the unconventional answer .
no . but seriously the issue of afghanistan first has to be seen as at least a to year perspective .
today the world of globalization is on speed .
time has been compressed .
and space does not exist for most people .
but in my world you know when i went back to afghanistan after years space had expanded .
every conceivable form of infrastructure had broken down .
i rode traveled travel between two cities that used to take three hours now took .
so the first is when the scale is that we need to recognize that just the simple things that are infrastructure it takes six years to deliver infrastructure .
in our world .
any meaningful sort of thing .
but the modality of attention or what is happening today what s happening tomorrow .
second is when a country has been subjected to one of the most immense brutal forms of exercise of power we had the red army for continuous years strong 
literally terrorizing .
the sky 
every afghan sees the sky as a source of fear .
we were bombed
practically out of existence .
then tens of thousands of people were trained in terrorism 
from all sides .
the united states great britain joined for instance egyptian intelligence service to train thousands of people in resistance and urban terrorism .
how to turn a bicycle into an instrument of terror .
how to turn a donkey a carthorse anything .
and the russians equally .
so when violence erupts in a country like afghanistan it s because of that legacy .
but we have to understand that we ve been incredibly lucky .
i mean i really can t believe how lucky i am here standing in front of you speaking .
when i joined as finance minister i thought that the chances of my living more than three years would not be more than five percent .
those were the risks . they were worth it .
i think we can make it and the reason we can make it is because of the people .
you see because i mean i give you one statistic .
 percent of the men in afghanistan percent of the women listen to at least three radio stations a day .
in terms of their discourse in terms of their sophistication of knowledge of the world i think that i would dare say they re much more sophisticated than rural americans with college degrees and the bulk of europeans 
because the world matters to them .
and what is their predominant concern ?
abandonment .
afghans have become deeply internationalist .
you know when i went back in december of i had absolutely no desire to work with the afghan government
because i d lived as a nationalist .
and i told them my people with the americans here separate .
yes i have an advisory position with the u .n .
i went through afghan provinces very rapidly .
and everybody was telling me it was a different world .
you know they engage .
they see engagement global engagement as absolutely necessary to the future of the ordinary people .
and the thing that the ordinary afghan is most concerned with is clare lockhart is here so i ll recite a discussion she had with an illiterate woman in northern afghanistan .
and that woman said she didn t care whether she had food on her table .
what she worried about was whether there was a plan for the future where her children could really have a different life .
that gives me hope .
ca how is afghanistan going to provide alternative income to the many people who are making their living off the drugs trade ?
ag certainly . well the first is instead of sending a billion dollars on drug eradication and paying it to a couple of security companies they should give this hundred billion dollars to of the most critically innovative companies in the world to ask them to create one million jobs .
the key to the drug eradication is jobs .
look there s a very little known fact countries that have a legal average income per capita of dollars don t produce drugs .
second textile .
trade is the key not aid .
the u .s . and europe should give us a zero percent tariff .
the textile industry is incredibly mobile .
if you want us to be able to compete with china and to attract investment we could probably attract four to six billion dollars quite easily in the textile sector if there was zero tariffs 
would create the type of job .
cotton does not compete with opium 
a t shirt does .
and we need to understand it s the value chain .
look the ordinary afghan is sick and tired of hearing about microcredit .
it is important 
but what the ordinary women and men who engage in micro production want is global access .
they don t want to sell to the charity bazaars that are only for foreigners and the same bloody shirt embroidered time and again .
what we want is a partnership with the italian design firms .
yeah we have the best embroiderers in the world !
why can t we do what was done with northern italy ?
with the put out system ?
so i think economically the critical issue really is to now think through .
and what i will say here is that aid doesn t work .
you know the aid system is broken .
the aid system does not have the knowledge the vision the ability .
i m all for it after all i raised a lot of it . yeah to be exact you know i managed to persuade the world that they had to give my country . billion .
they didn t want to give us the money .
ca and it still didn t work ?
ag no . it s not that it didn t work .
it s that a dollar of private investment in my judgment is equal at least to dollars of aid in terms of the dynamic that it generates .
second is that one dollar of aid could be cents it could be cents or it could be four dollars .
it depends on what form it comes what degrees of conditionalities are attached to it .
you know the aid system at first was designed to benefit entrepreneurs of the developed countries not to generate growth in the poor countries .
and this is again one of those assumptions the way car seats are an assumption that we ve inherited in governments and doors .
you would think that the us government would not think that american firms needed subsidizing to function in developing countries provide advice 
but they do .
there s an entire weight of history vis a vis aid that now needs to be reexamined .
if the goal is to build states that can credibly take care of themselves and i m putting that proposition equally you know i m very harsh on my counterparts aid must end in each country in a definable period .
and every year there must be progress on mobilization of domestic revenue and generation of the economy .
unless that kind of compact is entered into you will not be able to sustain the consensus .
i want to start off by saying houston we have a problem .
we re entering a second generation of no progress in terms of human flight in space . in fact we ve regressed .
we stand a very big chance of losing our ability to inspire our youth to go out and continue this very important thing that we as a species have always done .
and that is instinctively we ve gone out and climbed over difficult places went to more hostile places and found out later maybe to our surprise that that s the reason we survived .
and i feel very strongly that it s not good enough for us to have generations of kids that think that it s ok to look forward to a better version of a cell phone with a video in it .
they need to look forward to exploration they need to look forward to colonization they need to look forward to breakthroughs .
we need to inspire them because they need to lead us and help us survive in the future .
i m particularly troubled that what nasa s doing right now with this new bush doctrine to for this next decade and a half oh shoot i screwed up .
we have real specific instructions here not to talk about politics .
we re going to go back to the moon . . . years later ? and we re going to do it very specifically planned to not learn anything new .
i m really troubled by that . but anyway that s the basis of the thing that i want to share with you today though is that right back to where we inspire people who will be our great leaders later .
that s the theme of my next minutes here .
and i think that the inspiration begins when you re very young three year olds up to year olds . what they look at is the most important thing .
let s take a snapshot at aviation .
and there was a wonderful little short four year time period when marvelous things happened .
it started in when the wright brothers flew in paris and everybody said ooh hey i can do that . there s only a few people that have flown in early . in four years countries had hundreds of airplanes thousand of pilots . airplanes were invented by natural selection .
now you can say that intelligent design designs our airplanes of today but there was no intelligent design really designing those early airplanes .
there were probably at least different things tried and when they crash and kill the pilot don t try that again .
the ones that flew and landed ok because there were no trained pilots who had good flying qualities by definition .
so we by making a whole bunch of attempts thousands of attempts in that four year time period we invented the concepts of the airplanes that we fly today . and that s why they re so safe as we gave it a lot of chance to find what s good .
that has not happened at all in space flying .
there s only been two concepts tried two by the u .s . and one by the russians .
well who was inspired during that time period ?
aviation week asked me to make a list of who i thought were the movers and shakers of the first years of aviation .
and i wrote them down and i found out later that every one of them was a little kid in that wonderful renaissance of aviation .
well what happened when i was a little kid was some pretty heavy stuff too .
the jet age started the missile age started . von braun was on there showing how to go to mars and this was before sputnik .
and this was at a time when mars was a hell of a lot more interesting than it is now . we thought there d be animals there we knew there were plants there the colors change right ?
but you know nasa screwed that up because they ve sent these robots and they ve landed it only in the deserts .
if you look at what happened this little black line is as fast as man ever flew and the red line is top of the line military fighters and the blue line is commercial air transport .
you notice here s a big jump when i was a little kid and i think that had something to do with giving me the courage to go out and try something that other people weren t having the courage to try .
well what did i do when i was a kid ?
i didn t do the hotrods and the girls and the dancing
and well we didn t have drugs in those days . but i did competition model airplanes .
i spent about seven years during the vietnam war flight testing airplanes for the air force .
and then i went in and i had a lot of fun building airplanes that people could build in their garages .
and some of those are flying . of course one of them is around the world voyager . i founded another company in which is my company now .
and we have developed more than one new type of airplane every year since .
and there s a lot of them that i actually can t show you on this chart .
the most impressive airplane ever i believe was designed only a dozen years after the first operational jet .
stayed in service till it was too rusty to fly taken out of service .
we retreated in back to something that was developed in . what ?
the most impressive spaceship ever i believe was a grumman lunar lander . it was a you know it landed on the moon take off of the moon didn t need any maintenance guys that s kind of cool .
we ve lost that capability . we abandoned it in .
this thing was designed three years after gagarin first flew in space in .
three years and we can t do that now . crazy .
talk very briefly about innovation cycles things that grow have a lot of activity they die out when they re replaced by something else .
these things tend to happen every years .
 years long with an overlap . you can put that statement on all kinds of different technologies . the interesting thing by the way the speed here excuse me higher speed travel is the title of these innovation cycles . there is none here .
these two new airplanes are the same speed as the dc that was done in .
here s the biggie and that is you don t have innovation cycles if the government develops and the government uses it .
you know a good example of course is the darpa net .
computers were used for artillery first then irs .
but when we got it now you have all the level of activity all the benefit from it . private sector has to do it .
keep that in mind . i put down innovation i ve looked for innovation cycles in space i found none .
the very first year starting when gagarin went in space and a few weeks later alan shepherd there were five manned space flights in the world the very first year .
in everyone that the united states sent to space was killed .
there were only three or four flights in .
there is no growth . there s no activity . there s no nothing .
this is a picture here taken from spaceshipone .
this is a picture here taken from orbit .
our goal is to make it so that you can see this picture and really enjoy that .
we know how to do it for sub orbital flying now do it safe enough at least as safe as the early airlines so that can be done .
and i think i want to talk a little bit about why we had the courage to go out and try that as a small company .
well first of all what s going to happen next ?
the first industry will be a high volume a lot of players .
there s another one announced just last week .
that s you don t want to run a business with that kind of a safety record .
it ll be very high volume we think people will fly by .
i can t tell you when this will start because i don t want my competition to know my schedule .
but i think once it does we will find solutions 
and very quickly you ll see those resort hotels in orbit .
and that real easy thing to do which is a swing around the moon so you have this cool view . and that will be really cool .
because the moon doesn t have an atmosphere you can do an elliptical orbit and miss it by feet if you want .
oh it s going to be so much fun .
ok . my critics say hey rutan s just spending a lot of these billionaires money for joyrides for billionaires .
what s this ? this is not a transportation system it s just for fun . 
and i used to be bothered by that and then i got to thinking well wait a minute . i bought my first apple computer in and i bought it because i could say i got a computer at my house and you don t .
 what do you use it for ? come over . it does frogger . ok .
not the bank s computer or lockheed s computer but the home computer was for games .
for a whole decade it was for fun we didn t even know what it was for .
but what happened the fact that we had this big industry big development big improvement and capability and so on and they get out there in enough homes we were ripe for a new invention .
and the inventor is in this audience .
and it won t be very long before you won t be able to convince kids that we didn t always have computers in our homes .
so fun is defendable .
ok i want to show you kind of a busy chart but in it is my prediction with what s going to happen .
and in it also brings up another point right here .
paul allen elan musk richard branson jeff bezos the ansari family which is now funding the russians sub orbital thing bob bigelow a private space station and carmack .
it will allow us to colonize and to keep us from going extinct .
they were inspired by big progress . but look at the progress that s going on after that .
there were a couple of examples here .
the military fighters had a highest performance military airplane was the sr . it went a whole life cycle got too rusty to fly and was taken out of service . the concorde doubled the speed for airline travel .
it went a whole life cycle without competition took out of service . and we re stuck back here with the same kind of capability for military fighters and commercial airline travel that we had back in the late s .
but something is out there to inspire our kids now .
and i m talking about if you ve got a baby now or if you ve got a year old now .
what s out there is there s something really interesting going to happen here .
relatively soon you ll be able to buy a ticket and fly higher and faster than the highest performance military operational airplane . it s never happened before .
the fact that they have stuck here with this kind of performance has been well you know you win the war in minutes why do you need something better ?
but i think when you guys start buying tickets and flying sub orbital flights to space very soon wait a minute what s happening here we ll have military fighters with sub orbital capability and i think very soon this .
but the interesting thing about it is the commercial guys are going to go first .
ok i look forward to a new capitalist s space race let s call it .
you remember the space race in the s was for national prestige because we lost the first two milestones .
we didn t lose them technically . the fact that we had the hardware to put something in orbit when we let von braun fly it you can argue that s not a technical loss .
sputnik wasn t a technical loss but it was a prestige loss .
america the world saw america as not being the leader in technology and that was a very strong thing .
and then we flew alan shepherd weeks after gagarin not months or decades or whatever . so we had the capability .
but america lost . we lost . and because of that we made a big jump to recover it .
well again what s interesting here is we ve lost to the russians on the first couple of milestones already .
you cannot buy a ticket commercially to fly into space in america can t do it . you can buy it in russia .
you can fly with russian hardware . this is available because a russian space program is starving and it s nice for them to get million here and there to take one of the seats .
it s commercial . it can be defined as space tourism . they are also offering a trip to go on this whip around the moon like apollo was done .
 million bucks hey i can go to the moon .
but you know would you have thought back in the s when the space race was going on that the first commercial capitalist like thing to do to buy a ticket to go to the moon would be in russian hardware ?
and would you have thought would the russians have thought that when they first go to the moon in their developed hardware the guys inside won t be russians ? maybe it ll probably be a japanese or an american billionaire ? well that s weird you know it really is .
but anyway i think we need to beat them again .
i think what we ll do is we ll see a successful very successful private space flight industry . whether we re first or not really doesn t matter .
the russians actually flew a supersonic transport before the concorde .
and then they flew a few cargo flights and took it out of service .
i think you kind of see the same kind of parallel when the commercial stuff is offered .
ok we ll talk just a little bit about commercial development for human space flight .
and planned for the next few years . hey that s pretty big .
i m predicting though as profitable as this industry is going to be and it certainly is profitable when you fly people at dollars on something that you can actually operate at a tenth of that cost or less this is going to be very profitable .
i predict also that the investment that will flow into this will be somewhere around half of what the u .s . taxpayer spends for nasa s manned spacecraft work .
and that is because it s us . it s private industry .
you should never depend on the government to do this sort of stuff and we ve done it for a long time . the naca before nasa never developed an airliner and never ran an airline .
ok thank you very much .
what i want to talk about is as background is the idea that cars are art .
this is actually quite meaningful to me because car designers tend to be a little bit low on the totem pole 
we don t do coffee table books with just one lamp inside of it 
and cars are thought so much as a product that it s a little bit difficult to get into the aesthetic side under the same sort of terminology that one would discuss art .
and so cars as art brings it into an emotional plane if you accept that that you have to deal with on the same level you would with art with a capital a .
now at this point you re going to see a picture of michelangelo .
this is completely different than automobiles .
automobiles are self moving things right ? elevators are automobiles .
and they re not very emotional they solve a purpose 
and certainly automobiles have been around for years
and have made our lives functionally a lot better in many ways 
they ve also been a real pain in the ass 
because automobiles are really the thing we have to solve .
we have to solve the pollution we have to solve the congestion but that s not what interests me in this speech .
what interests me in this speech is cars . automobiles may be what you use but cars are what we are in many ways .
that s what i want to get to . cars are not a suit of clothes cars are an avatar . cars are an expansion of yourself they take your thoughts your ideas your emotions and they multiply it your anger whatever . it s an avatar .
it s a super waldo that you happen to be inside of and if you feel sexy the car is sexy . and if you re full of road rage you ve got a chevy like a rock right ?
cars are a sculpture did you know this ? that every car you see out there is sculpted by hand .
many people think well it s computers and it s done by machines and stuff like that . 
well they reproduce it but the originals are all done by hand .
it s done by men and women who believe a lot in their craft .
and they put that same kind of tension into the sculpting of a car that you do in a great sculpture that you would go and look at in a museum .
that tension between the need to express the need to discover then you put something new into it and at the same time you have bounds of craftsmanship .
rules that say this is how you handle surfaces this is what control is all about this is how you show you re a master of your craft .
and that tension that discovery that push for something new and at the same time that sense of obligation to the regards of craftsmanship that s as strong in cars as it is in anything .
we work in clay which hasn t changed much since michelangelo started screwing around with it 
and there s a very interesting analogy to that too .
real quickly michelangelo once said he s there to discover the figure within ok ?
there we go the automobile .
that was years right there did you catch that ?
between that one there and that one there it changed a lot didn t it ?
ok it s not marketing there s a very interesting car concept here but the marketing part is not what i want to talk about here .
i want to talk about this .
why it means you have to wash a car what is it that sensuality you have to touch about it ? that s the sculpture that goes into it . that sensuality .
and it s done by men and women working just like this making cars .
now this little quote about sculpture from henry moore 
i believe that that pressure within that moore s talking about at least when it comes to cars comes right back to this idea of the mean .
it s that will to live that need to survive to express itself that comes in a car and takes over people like me .
and we tell other people do this do this do this until this thing comes alive .
we are completely infected . and beauty can be the result of this infectiousness it s quite wonderful .
this sculpture is of course at the heart of all of it and it s really what puts the craftsmanship into our cars .
and it s not a whole lot different really when they re working like this or when somebody works like this .
it s that same kind of commitment that same kind of beauty .
now now i get to the point . i want to talk about cars as art .
art in the platonic sense is truth it s beauty and love .
now this is really where designers in car business diverge from the engineers .
we don t really have a problem talking about love .
we don t have a problem talking about truth or beauty in that sense .
that s what we re searching for when we re working our craft we are really trying to find that truth out there .
we re not trying to find vanity and beauty .
we re trying to find the beauty in the truth .
however engineers tend to look at things a little bit more newtonian instead of this quantum approach .
we re dealing with irrationalisms and we re dealing with paradoxes that we admit exist and the engineers tend to look things a little bit more like two and two is four and if you get . it s better and . is even better .
and that sometimes leads to bit of a divergence in why we re doing what we re doing .
we ve pretty much accepted the fact though that we are the women in the organization at bmw bmw is a very manly type business men men men it s engineers .
and we re kind of the female side to that . that s ok 
that s cool . you go off and be manly . we re going to be a little bit more female .
because what we re interested in is finding form that s more than just a function .
we re interested in finding beauty that s more than just an aesthetic 
it s really a truth .
and i think this idea of soul as being at the heart of great cars is very applicable . you all know it . you know a car when you ve seen it with soul . you know how strong this is .
well this experience of love and the experience of design to me are interchangeable . and now i m coming to my story .
i discovered something about love and design through a project called deep blue .
and first of all you have to go with me for a second and say 
you know you could take the word love out of a lot of things in our society put the word design in and it still works like this quote here you know . it kind of works you know ?
you can understand that . it works in truisms .
 all is fair in design and war . 
certainly we live in a competitive society .
i think this one here there s a pop song that really describes philippe starck for me you know this is like
you know this is like puppy love you know this is cool right ?
toothbrush cool .
it really only gets serious when you look at something like this . ok ?
this is one substitution that i believe all of us in design management are guilty of .
and this idea that there is more to love more to design when it gets down to your neighbor your other it can be physical like this and maybe in the future it will be .
but right now it s in dealing with our own people our own teams who are doing the creating . so to my story .
the idea of people work is what we work with here 
and i have to make a bond with my designers when we re creating bmws .
we have to have a shared intimacy a shared vision 
that means we have to work as one family 
we have to understand ourselves that way .
there s good times there s interesting times and there s some stress times too .
you want to do cars you ve got to go outside .
you ve got to do cars in the rain you ve got to do cars in the snow .
that s by the way is a presentation we made to our board of directors .
we haul their butts out in the snow too . you want to know cars outside ?
well you ve got to stand outside to do this .
and because these are artists they have very artistic temperaments .
all right ? now one thing about art is art is discovery and art is discovering yourself through your art . right ?
and one thing about cars is we re all a little bit like pygmalion we are completely in love with our own creations .
this is one of my favorite paintings it really describes our relationship with cars .
this is sick beyond belief .
but because of this the intimacy with which we work together as a team takes on a new dimension a new meaning .
we have a shared center we have a shared focus 
that car stays at the middle of all our relationships .
and it s my job in the competitive process to narrow this down .
i heard today about joseph s death genes that have to go in and kill cell reproduction .
you know that s what i have to do sometimes .
we start out with cars we narrow it down to five cars down to three cars down to two cars down to one car 
and i m in the middle of that killing basically .
someone s love someone s baby .
this is very difficult and you have to have a bond with your team that permits you to do this because their life is wrapped up in that too .
they ve got that gene infected in them as well and they want that to live more than anything else .
well this project deep blue put me in contact with my team in a way that i never expected and i want to pass it on to you because i want you to reflect on this perhaps in your own relationships .
we wanted to a do a car which was a complete leap of faith for bmw .
we wanted to do a team which was so removed from the way we d done it that i only had a phone number that connected me to them .
so what we did was instead of having a staff of artists that are just your wrist we decided to free up a team of creative designers and engineers to find out what s the successor to the suv phenomenon in america .
this is we did this project . and so we sent them off with this team name deep blue . now many people know deep blue from ibm 
we actually stole it from them because we figured if anybody read our faxes they d think we re talking about computers .
it turned out it was quite clever because deep blue in a company like bmw has a hook deep blue wow cool name . so people get wrapped up in it . and we took a team of designers 
and we sent them off to america . and we gave them a budget what we thought was a set of deliverables a timetable and nothing else .
like i said i just had a phone number that connected me to them .
and a group of engineers worked in germany and the idea was they would work separately on this problem of what s the successor to the suv .
they would come together compare notes . then they would work apart come together and they would produce together a monumental set of diverse opinions that didn t pollute each other s ideas but at the same time came together and resolved the problems .
hopefully really understand the customer at its heart where the customer is live with them in america . so sent the team off and actually something different happened . they went other places .
they disappeared quite honestly and all i got was postcards .
now i got some postcards of these guys in las vegas and i got some postcards of these guys in the grand canyon and i got these postcards of niagara falls and pretty soon they re in new york and i don t know where else .
and i m telling myself this is going to be a great car they re doing research that i ve never even thought about before . 
right ? and they decided that instead of like having a studio and six or seven apartments it was cheaper to rent elizabeth taylor s ex house in malibu .
and at least they told me it was her house i guess it was at one time she had a party there or something .
but anyway this was the house and they all lived there .
now this is living half a dozen people who d left their 
some had left their wives behind and families behind 
and they literally lived in this house for the entire six months the project was in america 
but the first three months were the most intensive .
and one of the young women in the project she was a fantastic lady she actually built her room in the bathroom .
the bathroom was so big she built the bed over the bathtub it s quite fascinating .
on the other hand i didn t know anything about this . ok ?
nothing . this is all going on and all i m getting is postcards
of these guys in las vegas or whatever saying don t worry chris this is really going to be good . ok ?
so my concept of what a design studio was probably i wasn t up to speed on where these guys were .
however the engineers back in munich had taken on this kind of newtonian solution and they were trying to find how many cup holders can dance on the head of a pin and you know these really serious questions that are confronting the modern consumer .
and one was hoping that these two teams would get together and this collusion of incredible creativity under these incredible surroundings and these incredibly stressed out engineers would create some incredible solutions .
well what i didn t know was and what we found out was these guys they can t even like talk to each other under those conditions .
you get a divergence of newtonian and quantum thinking at that point 
you have a split in your dialog that is so deep and so far that they cannot bring this together at all .
and so we had our first meeting after three months in tiburon which is just up the road from here you know tiburon ?
and the idea was after the first three months of this independent research they would present it all to dr . goschel who is now my boss and at that time he was co mentor on the project and they would present their results .
we would see where we were going we would see the first indication of what could be the successive phenomenon to the suv in america .
and so i had these ideas in my head that this is going to be great .
so we went to tiburon after three months 
and the team had gotten together the week before many days ahead of time .
the engineers flew over and designers got together with them and they put their presentation together .
well it turns out that the engineers hadn t done anything .
and they hadn t done anything because kind of like in car business engineers are there to solve problems 
and we were asking them to create a problem .
and the engineers were waiting for the designers to say this is the problem that we ve created now help us solve it . 
and they couldn t talk about it . so what happened was the engineers showed up with nothing .
and the engineers told the designers if you go in with all your stuff we ll walk out we ll walk right out of the project . 
so i didn t know any of this 
and we got a presentation that had an agenda looked like this .
there was a whole lot of dialog .
we spent four hours being told all about vocabulary that needs to be built between engineers and designers .
and here i m expecting at any moment ok they re going to turn the page and i m going to see the cars i m going to see the sketches i m going to see maybe some idea of where it s going . 
dialog kept on going with mental maps of words and pretty soon it was becoming obvious that instead of being dazzled with brilliance i was seriously being baffled with bullshit .
and if you can imagine what this is like to have these months of postcard indication of how great this team is working 
and they re out there spending all this money and they re learning and they re doing all this stuff .
i went fucking ballistic right ? i went nuts .
you can probably remember tiburon it used to look like this .
after four hours of this i stood up and i took this team apart .
i screamed at them i yelled at them what the hell are you doing ?
you re letting me down you re my designers 
you re supposed to be the creative ones 
what the hell is going on around here ? 
it was probably one of my better tirades i have some good ones but this was probably one of my better ones . and i went into these people 
how could they take bmw s money how could they have a holiday for three months and produce nothing nothing ?
because of course they didn t tell us that they had three station wagons full of drawings model concepts pictures everything i wanted 
they d locked up in the cars because they had shown solidarity with the engineers 
and they d decided not to show me anything in order to give the chance for problem solving a chance to start 
because they hadn t realized of course that they couldn t do problem creating .
so we went to lunch and i ve got to tell you this was one seriously quiet lunch .
the engineers all sat at one end of the table the designers and i sat at the other end of the table really quiet .
and i was just fucking furious furious . ok ?
probably because they had all the fun and i didn t you know .
that s what you get furious about right ?
and somebody asked me about catherine my wife you know did she fly out with me or something ?
i said no and it triggered a set of thoughts about my wife .
and i recalled that when catherine and i were married the priest gave a very nice sermon and he said something very important .
he said love is not selfish he said 
 love does not mean counting how many times i say i love you . 
it doesn t mean you had sex this many times this month and it s two times less than last month so that means you don t love me as much .
love is not selfish . and i thought about this and i thought you know i m not showing love here . i m seriously not showing love .
i m in the air i m in the air without trust .
this cannot be . this cannot be that i m expecting a certain number of sketches and to me that s my quantification method for qualifying a team .
this cannot be . 
so i told them this story . i said guys i m thinking about something here this isn t right . i can t have a relationship with you guys based on a premise that is a quantifiable one .
based on a dictate premise that says i m a boss you do what i say without trust . 
i said this can t be . 
and i think we felt much closer that day 
we cut a lot of strings that didn t need to be there and we forged the concept for what real team and creativity is all about .
we put the car back at the center of our thoughts and we put love i think truly back into the center of the process .
by the way that team went on to create six different concepts for the next model of what would be the proposal for the next generation after suvs in america .
one of those was the idea of a crossover coupes you see it downstairs the x coupe they had a lot of fun with that .
it was the rendition of our motorcycle the gs as carl magnusson says brute iful as the idea of what could be a motorcycle if you add two more wheels .
and so in conclusion my lesson that i wanted to pass on to you was this one here . i m also going to steal a little quote out of little prince . 
there s a lot to be said about trust and love if you know that those two words are synonymous for design .
i had a very very meaningful relationship with my team that day and it s stayed that way ever since .
and i hope that you too find that there s more to design and more towards the art of the design than doing it yourself .
it s true that the trust and the love that makes it worthwhile .
thanks so much .
at the break i was asked by several people about my comments about the aging debate .
and this will be my only comment on it . and that is i understand that optimists greatly outlive pessimists .
what i m going to tell you about in my minutes is how we re about to switch from reading the genetic code to the first stages of beginning to write the code ourselves .
it s only years ago this month when we published the first sequence of a free living organism that of haemophilus influenzae .
that took a genome project from years down to four months .
we can now do that same genome project in the order of two to eight hours .
so in the last decade a large number of genomes have been added most human pathogens a couple of plants several insects and several mammals including the human genome .
genomics at this stage of the thinking from a little over years ago was by the end of this year we might have between three and five genomes sequenced it s on the order of several hundred .
we just got a grant from the gordon and betty moore foundation to sequence genomes this year as a side project from environmental organisms .
so the rate of reading the genetic code has changed .
but as we look what s out there we ve barely scratched the surface on what is available on this planet .
most people don t realize it because they re invisible but microbes make up about a half of the earth s biomass whereas all animals only make up about one one thousandth of all the biomass .
and maybe it s something that people in oxford don t do very often but if you ever make it to the sea and you swallow a mouthful of seawater keep in mind that each milliliter has about a million bacteria and on the order of million viruses .
less than microbial species have been characterized as of two years ago and so we decided to do something about it .
and we started the sorcerer ii expedition 
where we were as with great oceanographic expeditions trying to sample the ocean every miles .
we started in bermuda for our test project 
then moved up to halifax working down the u .s . east coast the caribbean sea the panama canal through to the galapagos then across the pacific 
and we re in the process now of working our way across the indian ocean .
it s very tough duty we re doing this on a sailing vessel in part to help excite young people about going into science .
the experiments are incredibly simple .
we just take seawater and we filter it and we collect different size organisms on different filters 
and then take their dna back to our lab in rockville where we can sequence a hundred million letters of the genetic code every hours .
and with doing this we ve made some amazing discoveries .
for example it was thought that the visual pigments that are in our eyes there was only one or two organisms in the environment that had these same pigments .
it turns out almost every species in the upper parts of the ocean in warm parts of the world have these same photoreceptors and use sunlight as the source of their energy and communication .
from one site from one barrel of seawater we discovered . million new genes and as many as new species .
we ve extended this to the air now with a grant from the sloan foundation .
we re measuring how many viruses and bacteria all of us are breathing in and out every day particularly on airplanes or closed auditoriums .
we filter through some simple apparatuses we collect on the order of a billion microbes from just a day filtering on top of a building in new york city .
and we re in the process of sequencing all that at the present time .
just on the data collection side just where we are through the galapagos we re finding that almost every miles we see tremendous diversity in the samples in the ocean .
some of these make logical sense in terms of different temperature gradients .
so this is a satellite photograph based on temperatures red being warm blue being cold and we found there s a tremendous difference between the warm water samples and the cold water samples in terms of abundant species .
the other thing that surprised us quite a bit is these photoreceptors detect different wavelengths of light 
and we can predict that based on their amino acid sequence .
and these vary tremendously from region to region .
maybe not surprisingly in the deep ocean where it s mostly blue the photoreceptors tend to see blue light .
when there s a lot of chlorophyll around they see a lot of green light .
but they vary even more possibly moving towards infrared and ultraviolet in the extremes .
just to try and get an assessment of what our gene repertoire was 
we assembled all the data including all of ours thus far from the expedition which represents more than half of all the gene data on the planet and it totaled around million genes .
and we tried to put these into gene families to see what these discoveries are are we just discovering new members of known families or are we discovering new families ?
and it turns out we have about major gene families 
but every new sample we take in the environment adds in a linear fashion to these new families .
so we re at the earliest stages of discovery about basic genes components and life on this planet .
when we look at the so called evolutionary tree we re up on the upper right hand corner with the animals .
of those roughly million genes we only have around in our genome .
and if you take all animals together we probably share less than and probably maybe a dozen or more thousand different gene families .
i view that these genes are now not only the design components of evolution .
and we think in a gene centric view maybe going back to richard dawkins ideas than in a genome centric view which are different constructs of these gene components .
synthetic dna the ability to synthesize dna has changed at sort of the same pace that dna sequencing has over the last decade or two 
and is getting very rapid and very cheap .
our first thought about synthetic genomics came when we sequenced the second genome back in and that from mycoplasma genitalium .
and we have really nice t shirts that say you know i heart my genitalium . 
this is actually just a microorganism . but it has roughly genes .
haemophilus had genes .
and we simply asked the question if one species needs another is there a smaller set of genes that might comprise a minimal operating system ?
so we started doing transposon mutagenesis .
transposons are just small pieces of dna that randomly insert in the genetic code .
and if they insert in the middle of the gene they disrupt its function .
so we made a map of all the genes that could take transposon insertions
and we called those non essential genes . 
but it turns out the environment is very critical for this and you can only define an essential or non essential gene based on exactly what s in the environment .
we also tried to take a more directly intellectual approach with the genomes of related organisms 
and we tried to compare all of those to see what they had in common .
and we got these overlapping circles . and we found only genes common to all organisms .
the pool expanded a little bit if we ignored one intracellular parasite it expanded even more when we looked at core sets of genes of around or so .
so we think that we can expand or contract genomes depending on your point of view here to maybe to genes from the minimal of .
the only way to prove these ideas was to construct an artificial chromosome with those genes in them 
and we had to do this in a cassette based fashion .
we found that synthesizing accurate dna in large pieces was extremely difficult .
ham smith and clyde hutchison my colleagues on this developed an exciting new method that allowed us to synthesize a base pair virus in only a two week period that was percent accurate in terms of its sequence and its biology .
it was a quite exciting experiment when we just took the synthetic piece of dna injected it in the bacteria and all of a sudden that dna started driving the production of the virus particles that turned around and then killed the bacteria .
this was not the first synthetic virus a polio virus had been made a year before but it was only one ten thousandth as active and it took three years to do .
this is a cartoon of the structure of phi x .
this is a case where the software now builds its own hardware and that s the notions that we have with biology .
people immediately jump to concerns about biological warfare 
and i had recent testimony before a senate committee and a special committee the u .s . government has set up to review this area .
and i think it s important to keep reality in mind versus what happens with people s imaginations .
basically any virus that s been sequenced today that genome can be made .
and people immediately freak out about things about ebola or smallpox but the dna from this organism is not infective .
so even if somebody made the smallpox genome that dna itself would not cause infections .
the real concern that security departments have is designer viruses .
and there s only two countries the u .s . and the former soviet union that had major efforts on trying to create biological warfare agents .
if that research is truly discontinued there should be very little activity on the know how to make designer viruses in the future .
i think single cell organisms are possible within two years .
and possibly eukaryotic cells those that we have are possible within a decade .
so we re now making several dozen different constructs because we can vary the cassettes and the genes that go into this artificial chromosome .
the key is how do you put all of the others ?
we start with these fragments and then we have a homologous recombination system that reassembles those into a chromosome .
this is derived from an organism deinococcus radiodurans that can take three million rads of radiation and not be killed .
it reassembles its genome after this radiation burst in about to hours after its chromosomes are literally blown apart .
this organism is ubiquitous on the planet and exists perhaps now in outer space due to all our travel there .
this is a glass beaker after about half a million rads of radiation .
the glass started to burn and crack while the microbes sitting in the bottom just got happier and happier .
here s an actual picture of what happens the top of this shows the genome after . million rads of radiation .
the chromosome is literally blown apart .
and here s that same dna automatically reassembled hours later .
it s truly stunning that these organisms can do that 
and we probably have thousands if not tens of thousands of different species on this planet that are capable of doing that .
after these genomes are synthesized the first step is just transplanting them into a cell without a genome .
so we think synthetic cells are going to have tremendous potential not only for understanding the basis of biology but for hopefully environmental and society issues .
for example from the third organism we sequenced methanococcus jannaschii it lives in boiling water temperatures its energy source is hydrogen and all its carbon comes from co it captures back from the environment .
so we know lots of different pathways thousands of different organisms now that live off of co and can capture that back .
so instead of using carbon from oil for synthetic processes we have the chance of using carbon and capturing it back from the atmosphere 
converting that into biopolymers or other products .
we have one organism that lives off of carbon monoxide 
and we use as a reducing power to split water to produce hydrogen and oxygen .
also there s numerous pathways that can be engineered metabolizing methane .
and dupont has a major program with statoil in norway to capture and convert the methane from the gas fields there into useful products .
within a short while i think there s going to be a new field called combinatorial genomics because with these new synthesis capabilities these vast gene array repertoires and the homologous recombination we think we can design a robot to make maybe a million different chromosomes a day .
and therefore as with all biology you get selection through screening 
whether you re screening for hydrogen production or chemical production or just viability .
to understand the role of these genes is going to be well within reach .
we re trying to modify photosynthesis to produce hydrogen directly from sunlight .
photosynthesis is modulated by oxygen and we have an oxygen insensitive hydrogenase that we think will totally change this process .
we re also combining cellulases the enzymes that break down complex sugars into simple sugars and fermentation in the same cell for producing ethanol .
pharmaceutical production is already under way in major laboratories using microbes .
the chemistry from compounds in the environment is orders of magnitude more complex than our best chemists can produce .
i think future engineered species could be the source of food hopefully a source of energy environmental remediation and perhaps replacing the petrochemical industry .
let me just close with ethical and policy studies .
we delayed the start of our experiments in until we completed a year and a half bioethical review as to whether we should try and make an artificial species .
every major religion participated in this .
it was actually a very strange study because the various religious leaders were using their scriptures as law books 
and they couldn t find anything in them prohibiting making life so it must be ok . the only ultimate concerns were biological warfare aspects of this 
but gave us the go ahead to start these experiments for the reasons we were doing them .
right now the sloan foundation has just funded a multi institutional study on this to work out what the risk and benefits to society are and the rules that scientific teams such as my own should be using in this area 
and we re trying to set good examples as we go forward .
these are complex issues .
except for the threat of bio terrorism they re very simple issues in terms of can we design things to produce clean energy perhaps revolutionizing what developing countries can do and provide through various simple processes .
thank you very much .
hello voice mail my old friend . i ve called for tech support again . i ignored my boss s warning . i called on a monday morning . now it s evening and my dinner first grew cold and then grew mold . i m still on hold .
and you listen to the sounds of silence . thank you . good evening and welcome to spot the ted presenter who used to be a broadway accompanist . 
when i was offered the times column six years ago the deal was like this you ll be sent the coolest hottest slickest new gadgets .
every week it ll arrive at your door .
you get to try them out play with them evaluate them until the novelty wears out before you have to send them back 
and you ll get paid for it . you can think about it if you want .
so i ve always been a technology nut and i absolutely love it .
the job though came with one small downside and that is 
they intended to publish my email address at the end of every column .
and what i ve noticed is first of all you get an incredible amount of email .
if you ever are feeling lonely get a new york times column because you will get hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of emails .
and the email i m getting a lot today is about frustration .
people are feeling like things ok i just had an alarm come up on my screen . lucky you can t see it .
people are feeling overwhelmed . they re feeling like it s too much technology too fast .
it may be good technology but i feel like there s not enough of a support structure .
there s not enough help . there s not enough thought put into the design of it
to make it easy and enjoyable to use . one time i wrote a column about my efforts to reach dell technical support and within hours there were messages from readers on the feedback boards on the times website from users saying 
 me too and here s my tale of woe . i call it software rage . 
and man let me tell you whoever figures out how to make money off of this frustration will oh how did that get up there ? just kidding .
ok so why is the problem accelerating ? and part of the problem is ironically because the industry has put so much thought into making things easier to use .
i ll show you what i mean .
this is what the computer interface used to look like dos .
over the years it s gotten easier to use .
this is the original mac operating system .
reagan was president . madonna was still a brunette .
and the entire operating system this is the good part the entire operating system fit in k .
you couldn t put the mac os x logo in k !
so the irony is that as these things became easier to use a less technical broader audience was coming into contact with this equipment for the first time .
i once had the distinct privilege of sitting in on the apple call center for a day .
the guy had a duplicate headset for me to listen to .
and the calls that you know how they say your call may be recorded for quality assurance ? 
uh uh . your call may be recorded so that they can collect the funniest dumb user stories and pass them around on a cd .
which they do .
and i have a copy .
it s in your gift bag . no no .
with your voices on it !
so some of the stories are just so classic and yet so understandable .
a woman called apple to complain that her mouse was squeaking . and the technician said 
 well ma am what do you mean your mouse is squeaking ? 
she says all i can tell you is that it squeaks louder the faster i move it across the screen . 
and the technician s like ma am you ve got the mouse up against the screen ? 
she goes well the message said click here to continue . 
well if you like that one how much time have we got ?
another one a guy called this is absolutely true his computer had crashed and he told the technician he couldn t restart it no matter how many times he typed . 
and the technician said what ? why are you typing ? 
he said the message says error type . 
so we must admit that some of the blame falls squarely at the feet of the users .
but why is the technical overload crisis the complexity crisis accelerating now ?
in the hardware world it s because we the consumers want everything to be smaller smaller smaller .
so the gadgets are getting tinier and tinier but our fingers are essentially staying the same size .
so it gets to be more and more of a challenge .
software is subject to another primal force the mandate to release more and more versions .
when you buy a piece of software it s not like buying a vase or a candy bar where you own it . it s more like joining a club where you pay dues every year 
and every year they say we ve added more features and we ll sell it to you for . 
i know one guy who s spent just on photoshop over the years .
and software companies make percent of their revenue from just these software upgrades .
i call it the software upgrade paradox which is that if you improve a piece of software enough times you eventually ruin it .
i mean microsoft word was last just a word processor in you know the eisenhower administration .
but what s the alternative ? microsoft actually did this experiment .
they said well wait a minute . everyone complains that we re adding so many features .
let s create a word processor that s just a word processor 
simple pure does not do web pages is not a database . 
and it came out and it was called microsoft write .
and none of you are nodding in acknowledgment because it died .
it tanked . no one ever bought it .
i call this the sport utility principle .
people like to surround themselves with unnecessary power right ?
they don t need the database and the website but they re like well i ll upgrade because i might you know i might need that someday . 
so the problem is as you add more features where are they going to go ?
where are you going to stick them ? you only have so many design tools .
you can do buttons you can do sliders pop up menus sub menus .
but if you re not careful about how you choose you wind up with this .
this is an un retouched this is not a joke un retouched photo of microsoft word the copy that you have with all the toolbars open .
you ve obviously never opened all the toolbars but all you have to type in is this little teeny window down here .
and we ve arrived at the age of interface matrices where there are so many features and options you have to do two dimensions you know a vertical and a horizontal .
you guys all complain about how microsoft word is always bulleting your lists and underlining your links automatically .
the off switch is in there somewhere .
i m telling you it s there .
part of the art of designing a simple good interface is knowing when to use which one of these features .
so here is the log off dialogue box for windows .
there are only four choices so why are they in a pop up menu ?
it s not like the rest of the screen is so full of other components that you need to collapse the choices .
they could have put them all out in view .
here s apple s take on the exact same dialogue box .
thank you yes i designed the dialogue box . no no .
already we can see that apple and microsoft have a severely divergent approach to software design .
microsoft s approach to simplicity tends to be let s break it down let s just make it more steps .
there are these wizards everywhere .
and you know there s a new version of windows coming out this fall .
if they continue at this pace there s absolutely no telling where they might wind up . welcome to the type a word wizard 
 welcome to the type a word wizard . ok i ll bite . let s click next to continue .
from the drop down menu choose the first letter you want to type . ok .
so there is a limit that we don t want to cross . so what is the answer ?
how do you pack in all these features in a simple intelligent way ?
i believe in consistency when possible real world equivalents trash can folder when possible label things mostly .
but i beg of the designers here to break all those rules if they violate the biggest rule of all which is intelligence . now what do i mean by that ?
i m going to give you some examples where intelligence makes something not consistent but it s better .
if you are buying something on the web you re supposed to put in your address and you re supposed to choose what country you re from ok ?
there are countries in the world . we like to think of the internet as a global village . i m sorry it s not one yet .
it s mainly like the united states europe and japan .
so why is united states in the u s ?
you have to scroll like seven screensful to get to it .
now it would be inconsistent to put united states first but it would be intelligent .
this one s been touched on before but why in god s name do you shut down a windows pc by clicking a button called start ? 
here s another pet one of mine you have a printer .
most of the time you want to print one copy of your document in page order on that printer .
so why in god s name do you see this every time you print ?
it s like a shuttle cockpit .
and one of the buttons at the bottom you ll notice is not print . 
now i m not saying that apple is the only company who has embraced the cult of simplicity .
palm is also especially in the old days wonderful about this .
i actually got to speak to palm when they were flying high in the s and after the talk i met one of the employees .
he says nice talk . and i said thank you . what do you do here ? 
he said i m a tap counter . i m like you re a what ? 
he goes well jeff hawkins the ceo says if any task on the palm pilot takes more than three taps of the stylus it s too long and it has to be redesigned . 
so i m the tap counter . 
so i m going to show you an example of a company that does not have a tap counter .
this is microsoft word .
ok when you want to create a new blank document in word it could happen . you go up to the file menu and you choose new . 
now what happens when you choose new ? do you get a new blank document ?
you do not .
on the opposite side of the monitor a task bar appears and somewhere in those links by the way not at the top somewhere in those links is a button that makes you a new document .
ok so that is a company not counting taps .
you know i don t want to just stand here and make fun of microsoft . . .
yes i do .
the bill gates song !
there s the old one responsible for windows and office .
they re dying to throw the whole thing out and start fresh but they can t . they re locked in because so many add ons and other company stuff
locks into the old chassis .
but there s also a new microsoft that s really doing good simple interface designs .
i liked the media center pc . i liked the microsoft spot watch .
the wireless watch flopped miserably in the market but it wasn t because it wasn t simply and beautifully designed .
but let s put it this way would you pay a month to have a watch that has to be recharged every night like your cell phone and stops working when you leave your area code ?
so the signs might indicate that the complexity crunch is only going to get worse .
so is there any hope ? the screens are getting smaller people are illuminating 
putting manuals in the boxes 
things are coming out at a faster pace .
with madonna and i m like you know what ? i ve got to do one about steve jobs .
you try rhyming with garage !
and the truth is 
for years i was a little depressed 
because americans obviously did not value it because the mac had three percent market share windows had percent market share 
people did not think it was worth putting a price on it .
so i was a little depressed . and then i heard al gore s talk and i realized i didn t know the meaning of depressed .
but it turns out i was wrong right ?
because the ipod came out and it violated every bit of common wisdom .
other products cost less other products had more features 
they had voice recorders and fm transmitters .
the other products were backed by microsoft with an open standard not apple s propriety standard .
but the ipod won this is the one they wanted .
the lesson was simplicity sells .
and there are signs that the industry is getting the message .
this is a little company that s done very well with simplicity and elegance . the sonos thing it s catching on .
i ve got just a couple examples . physically a really cool elegant thinking coming along lately .
when you have a digital camera how do you get the pictures back to your computer ? well you either haul around a usb cable 
or you buy a card reader and haul that around . either one you re going to lose .
what i do is i take out the memory card and i fold it in half revealing usb contacts .
i just stick it in the computer offload the pictures put it right back in the camera . i never have to lose anything .
here s another example .
chris you re the source of all power . will you be my power plug ?
chris anderson oh yeah . dp hold that and don t let go .
you might ve seen this this is apple s new laptop . this the power cord . it hooks on like this .
and i m sure every one of you has done this at some point in your lives or one of your children .
you walk along and i m about to pull this onto the floor . i don t care . it s a loaner .
here we go . whoa ! it s magnetic it doesn t pull the laptop onto the floor .
in my very last example 
i do a lot of my work using speech recognition software .
and i ll just you have to be kind of quiet because the software is nervous .
speech recognition software is really great for doing emails very quickly period .
like i get hundreds of them a day period .
and it s not just what i dictate that it writes down period .
i also use this feature called voice macros period .
correct dissuade . not just . 
ok this is not an ideal situation because it s getting the echo from the hall and stuff .
the point is i can respond to people very quickly by saying a short word and having it write out a much longer thing .
so the point is this is a really interesting story .
this is version eight of this software and do you know what they put in version eight ?
no new features . it s never happened before in software !
the company put no new features . they just said we ll make this software work right . right ?
because for years people had bought this software tried it out percent accuracy was all they got which means one in words is wrong and they d put it in their drawer .
and the company got sick of that 
so they said this version we re not going to do anything but make sure it s darned accurate . 
and so that s what they did . this cult of doing things right is starting to spread .
so my final advice for those of you who are consumers of this technology remember if it doesn t work it s not necessarily you ok ?
it could be the design of the thing you re using .
be aware in life of good design and bad design .
and if you re among the people who create this stuff easy is hard .
pre sweat the details for your audience . count the taps .
remember the hard part is not deciding what features to add it s deciding what to leave out .
and best of all your motivation is simplicity sells .
ca bravo . dp thank you very much .
ca hear hear !
with all the legitimate concerns about aids and avian flu and we ll hear about that from the brilliant dr . brilliant later today 
i want to talk about the other pandemic which is cardiovascular disease diabetes hypertension 
all of which are completely preventable for at least percent of people just by changing diet and lifestyle .
and what s happening is that there s a globalization of illness occurring that people
are starting to eat like us and live like us and die like us . and in one generation for example 
asia s gone from having one of the lowest rates of heart disease and obesity and diabetes to one of the highest . and in africa cardiovascular disease
equals the hiv and aids deaths in most countries . so there s a critical window of opportunity we
have to make an important difference that can affect the lives of literally millions of people and practice preventive medicine on a global scale .
heart and blood vessel diseases still kill more people not only in this country but also worldwide than everything else combined and yet
it s completely preventable for almost everybody .
it s not only preventable it s actually
reversible . and for the last almost years we ve been able to show that by simply changing diet and lifestyle using these very high tech expensive state of the art measures to prove how
arteriography before and after a year and cardiac pet scans .
we showed a few months ago we published the first study showing you can actually stop or reverse the progression of prostate cancer by making changes in diet and lifestyle and percent
regression in the tumor growth or inhibition of the tumor growth compared to only nine percent in the control group .
and in the mri and mr spectroscopy here the prostate tumor activity is shown in red you can see it diminishing after a year .
now there is an epidemic of obesity two thirds of
adults and percent of kids . what s really concerning
to me is that diabetes has increased percent in the past years and this may be the first
generation in which our kids live a shorter life
span than we do . that s pitiful and it s preventable .
kind of devolving . now what can we do about this ? well you know the diet that we ve found that can reverse heart disease and cancer is an asian diet .
but the people in asia are starting to eat like we are which is why they re starting to get sick like we are .
so i ve been working with a lot of the big food
companies . they can make it fun and sexy and hip and crunchy and convenient to eat healthier foods like i chair the advisory boards to mcdonald s and pepsico and conagra and safeway and soon del monte and they re finding that it s good business .
the salads that you see at mcdonald s came from the work they re going to have an asian salad . at
pepsi two thirds of their revenue growth came from their better foods .
and so if we can do that then we can free up resources for buying drugs that you really do need for treating aids and hiv and malaria and for preventing avian flu . thank you .
good morning everyone . first of all it s been fantastic being here over these past few days .
and secondly i feel it s a great honor to kind of wind up this extraordinary gathering of people these amazing talks that we ve had .
i feel that i ve fitted in in many ways to some of the things that i ve heard .
i came directly here from the deep deep tropical rainforest in ecuador 
where i was out you could only get there by a plane with indigenous people with paint on their faces and parrot feathers on their headdresses 
where these people are fighting to try and keep the oil companies and keep the roads out of their forests .
they re fighting to develop their own way of living within the forest in a world that s clean a world that isn t contaminated a world that isn t polluted .
the water was cleaned but because they got a lot of batteries they were able to store a lot of electricity .
so every house and there were i think eight houses in this little community could have light for i think it was about half an hour each evening .
and there is the chief in all his regal finery with a laptop computer .
we want to know about health care .
we want to know about what other people do we re interested in it .
and we want to learn other languages .
we want to know english and french and perhaps chinese and we re good at languages . 
and so coming directly from there to here .
but of course my real field of expertise lies in an even different kind of civilization 
i can t really call it a civilization .
a different way of life a different being .
we ve talked earlier this wonderful talk by wade davis about the different cultures of the humans around the world but the world is not composed only of human beings there are also other animal beings .
and i propose to bring into this ted conference as i always do around the world the voice of the animal kingdom .
too often we just see a few slides or a bit of film but these beings have voices that mean something .
and so i want to give you a greeting as from a chimpanzee in the forests of tanzania ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh !
i ve been studying chimpanzees in tanzania since .
during that time there have been modern technologies that have really transformed the way that field biologists do their work .
for example for the first time a few years ago by simply collecting little fecal samples we were able to have them analyzed to have dna profiling done so for the first time we actually know which male chimps are the fathers of each individual infant .
because the chimps have a very promiscuous mating society .
so this opens up a whole new avenue of research .
and we use gsi geographic whatever it is gsi to determine the range of the chimps .
and we re using you can see that i m not really into this kind of stuff but we re using satellite imagery to look at the deforestation in the area .
and of course there s developments in infrared so you can watch animals at night 
and equipment for recording by video and tape recording is getting lighter and better .
so in many many ways we can do things today that we couldn t do when i began in .
especially when chimpanzees and other animals with large brains are studied in captivity modern technology is helping us to search for the upper levels of cognition in some of these non human animals .
so that we know today they re capable of performances that would have been thought absolutely impossible by science when i began .
i think the chimpanzee in captivity who is the most skilled in intellectual performance is one called ai in japan her name means love and she has a wonderfully sensitive partner working with her .
she loves her computer she ll leave her big group and her running water and her trees and everything .
and she ll come in to sit at this computer it s like a video game for a kid she s hooked .
she s by the way and she does things with her computer screen and a touch pad that she can do faster than most humans .
she does very complex tasks and i haven t got time to go into them but the amazing thing about this female is she doesn t like making mistakes .
if she has a bad run and her score isn t good she ll come and reach up and tap on the glass because she can t see the experimenter which is asking to have another go .
and her concentration she s already concentrated hard for minutes or so and now she wants to do it all over again just for the satisfaction of having done it better .
and the food is not important she does get a tiny reward like one raisin for a correct response but she will do it for nothing if you tell her beforehand .
so here we are a chimpanzee using a computer .
chimpanzees gorillas orangutans also learn human sign language .
and i saw this dark shape hunched over a termite mound and i peered with my binoculars .
it was fortunately one adult male whom i d named david greybeard and by the way science at that time was telling me that i shouldn t name the chimps they should all have numbers that was more scientific .
anyway david greybeard and i saw that he was picking little pieces of grass and using them to fish termites from their underground nest .
and not only that he would sometimes pick a leafy twig and strip the leaves 
modifying an object to make it suitable for a specific purpose the beginning of tool making .
the reason this was so exciting and such a breakthrough is at that time it was thought that humans and only humans used and made tools .
when i was at school we were defined as man the toolmaker .
so that when louis leakey my mentor heard this news he said ah we must now redefine man redefine tool or accept chimpanzees as humans . 
we now know that at gombe alone there are nine different ways in which chimpanzees use different objects for different purposes .
moreover we know that in different parts of africa wherever chimps have been studied there are completely different tool using behaviors .
and because it seems that these patterns are passed from one generation to the next through observation imitation and practice that is a definition of human culture .
it s a very wuzzy line .
it s getting wuzzier all the time as we find animals doing things that we in our arrogance used to think was just human .
the chimps there s no time to discuss their fascinating lives but they have this long childhood five years of suckling and sleeping with the mother and then another three four or five years of emotional dependence on her even when the next child is born .
the importance of learning in that time when behavior is flexible and there s an awful lot to learn in chimpanzee society .
the long term affectionate supportive bonds that develop throughout this long childhood with the mother with the brothers and sisters and which can last through a lifetime which may be up to years .
they can actually live longer than in captivity 
so we ve only done years in the wild so far .
and we find chimps are capable of true compassion and altruism .
we find in their non verbal communication this is very rich they have a lot of sounds which they use in different circumstances but they also use touch posture gesture and what do they do ?
they kiss they embrace they hold hands .
they pat one another on the back they swagger they shake their fist the kind of things that we do and they do them in the same kind of context .
they have very sophisticated cooperation .
sometimes they hunt not that often but when they hunt they show sophisticated cooperation and they share the prey .
we find that they show emotions similar to maybe sometimes the same as those that we describe in ourselves as happiness sadness fear despair .
they know mental as well as physical suffering .
and i don t have time to go into the information that will prove some of these things to you save to say that there are very bright students in the best universities studying emotions in animals studying personalities in animals .
we know that chimpanzees and some other creatures can recognize themselves in mirrors self as opposed to other . 
they have a sense of humor and these are the kind of things which traditionally have been thought of as human prerogatives .
but this teaches us a new respect and it s a new respect not only for the chimpanzees i suggest but some of the other amazing animals with whom we share this planet .
so the sad thing is that these chimpanzees who ve perhaps taught us more than any other creature a little humility are in the wild disappearing very fast .
they re disappearing for the reasons that all of you in this room know only too well .
the deforestation the growth of human populations needing more land .
they re disappearing because some timber companies go in with clear cutting .
they re disappearing in the heart of their range in africa because the big multinational logging companies have come in and made roads as they want to do in ecuador and other parts where the forests remain untouched to take out oil or timber .
and this has led in congo basin and other parts of the world to what is known as the bush meat trade .
they shoot everything every single thing that moves that s bigger than a small rat they sun dry it or smoke it .
and now they ve got transport they take it on the logging trucks or the mining trucks into the towns where they sell it .
and people will pay more for bush meat as it s called than for domestic meat it s culturally preferred .
their culture is being destroyed along with the animals upon whom they depend .
so when the logging camp moves there s nothing left .
we talked already about the loss of human cultural diversity 
and i ve seen it happening with my own eyes .
and the grim picture in africa i love africa and what do we see in africa ?
we see deforestation we see the desert spreading we see massive hunger we see disease and we see population growth in areas where there are more people living on a certain piece of land than the land can possibly support and they re too poor to buy food from elsewhere .
were the people that we heard about yesterday on the easter island who cut down their last tree were they stupid ?
didn t they know what was happening ?
of course but if you ve seen the crippling poverty in some of these parts of the world it isn t a question of let s leave the tree for tomorrow . how am i going to feed my family today ?
maybe i can get just a few dollars from this last tree which will keep us going a little bit longer and then we ll pray that something will happen to save us from the inevitable end . 
so this is a pretty grim picture .
the one thing we have which makes us so different from chimpanzees or other living creatures is this sophisticated spoken language a language with which we can tell children about things that aren t here .
we can talk about the distant past plan for the distant future discuss ideas with each other so that the ideas can grow from the accumulated wisdom of a group .
we can do it by talking to each other we can do it through video we can do it through the written word .
and we are abusing this great power we have to be wise stewards and we re destroying the world .
in the developed world in a way it s worse because we have so much access to knowledge of the stupidity of what we re doing .
do you know we re bringing little babies into a world where in many places the water is poisoning them ?
and the air is harming them and the food that s grown from the contaminated land is poisoning them .
and that s not just in the far away developing world that s everywhere .
do you know we all have about chemicals in our bodies we didn t have about years ago ?
and so many of these diseases like asthma and certain kinds of cancers are on the increase around places where our filthy toxic waste is dumped .
we re harming ourselves around the world as well as harming the animals as well as harming nature herself 
mother nature that brought us into being 
mother nature where i believe we need to spend time where there s trees and flowers and birds for our good psychological development .
and yet there are hundreds and hundreds of children in the developed world who never see nature because they re growing up in concrete
and all they know is virtual reality with no opportunity to go and lie in the sun or in the forest with the dappled sun specks coming down from the canopy above .
as i was traveling around the world you know i had to leave the forest that s where i love to be .
and the more i talked about the chimpanzees plight the more i realized the fact that everything s interconnected and the problems of the developing world so often stem from the greed of the developed world 
and everything was joining together and making not sense hope lies in sense you said it s making a nonsense .
how can we do it ?
somebody said that yesterday . and as i was traveling around i kept meeting young people who d lost hope .
they were feeling despair they were feeling well it doesn t matter what we do eat drink and be merry for tomorrow we die .
everything is hopeless we re always being told so by the media . 
and then i met some who were angry and anger that can turn to violence and we re all familiar with that .
and i have three little grandchildren and when some of these students would say to me at high school or university they d say we re angry or we re filled with despair because we feel you ve compromised our future and there s nothing we can do about it . 
and i looked in the eyes of my little grandchildren and think how much we ve harmed this planet since i was their age .
i feel this deep shame and that s why in in tanzania i started a program that s called roots and shoots .
there s little brochures all around outside and if any of you have anything to do with children and care about their future i beg that you pick up that brochure .
and roots and shoots is a program for hope .
roots make a firm foundation .
shoots seem tiny but to reach the sun they can break through brick walls .
see the brick walls as all the problems that we ve inflicted on this planet .
then you see it is a message of hope .
hundreds and thousands of young people around the world can break through and can make this a better world .
and the most important message of roots and shoots is that every single individual makes a difference .
every individual has a role to play .
every one of us impacts the world around us everyday and you scientists know that you can t actually even if you stay in bed all day you re breathing oxygen and giving out co and probably going to the loo and things like that 
you re making a difference in the world .
so the roots and shoots program involves youth in three kinds of projects .
and these are projects to make the world around them a better place .
one project to show care and concern for your own human community .
one for animals including domestic animals and i have to say i learned everything i know about animal behavior even before i got to gombe and the chimps from my dog rusty who was my childhood companion .
and the third kind of project something for the local environment .
so what the kids do depends first of all how old are they and we go now from pre school right through university .
it s going to depend whether they re inner city or rural .
it s going to depend if they re wealthy or impoverished .
it s going to depend which part say of america they re in .
we re in every state now and the problems in florida are different from the problems in new york .
why ?
because they re buying into it and they re the ones who get to decide what they re going to do .
it isn t something that their parents tell them or their teachers tell them .
that s effective but if they decide themselves we want to clean this river and put the fish back that used to be there .
we want to clear away the toxic soil from this area and have an organic garden .
we want to go and spend time with the old people and hear their stories and record their oral histories .
we want to go and work in a dog shelter .
we want to learn about animals . we want . . . 
you know it goes on and on and this is very hopeful for me .
as i travel around the world days a year everywhere there s a group of roots and shoots of different ages .
everywhere there are children with shining eyes saying look at the difference we ve made . 
and now comes the technology into it because with this new way of communicating electronically these kids can communicate with each other around the world .
and if anyone is interested to help us we ve got so many ideas but we need help we need help to create the right kind of system that will help these young people to communicate their excitement .
but also and this is so important to communicate their despair to say we ve tried this and it doesn t work and what shall we do ? 
and then lo and behold there s another group answering these kids who may be in america or maybe this is a group in israel saying yeah you did it a little bit wrong . this is how you should do it . 
the philosophy is very simple .
we do not believe in violence .
no violence no bombs no guns .
that s not the way to solve problems .
violence leads to violence at least in my view .
so how do we solve ?
the tools for solving the problems are knowledge and understanding .
know the facts but see how they fit in the big picture .
hard work and persistence don t give up and love and compassion leading to respect for all life .
how many more minutes ? two one ?
chris anderson one one to two .
jane goodall two two i m going to take two .
are you going to come and drag me off ?
anyway so basically roots and shoots is beginning to change young people s lives .
it s what i m devoting most of my energy to .
and i believe that a group like this can have a very major impact not just because you can share technology with us but because so many of you have children .
and if you take this program out and give it to your children they have such a good opportunity to go out and do good because they ve got parents like you .
and it s been so clear how much you all care about trying to make this world a better place .
it s very encouraging .
but the kids do ask me and this won t take more than two minutes i promise the kids say dr . jane do you really have hope for the future ?
you travel you see all these horrible things happening . 
firstly the human brain i don t need to say anything about that .
now that we know what the problems are around the world human brains like yours are rising to solve those problems .
and we ve talked a lot about that .
secondly the resilience of nature .
we can destroy a river and we can bring it back to life .
we can see a whole area desolated and it can be brought back to bloom again with time or a little help .
and thirdly the last speaker talked about or the speaker before last talked about the indomitable human spirit .
we are surrounded by the most amazing people who do things that seem to be absolutely impossible .
nelson mandela i take a little piece of limestone from robben island prison where he labored for years and came out with so little bitterness he could lead his people from the horror of apartheid without a bloodbath .
even after the th of september and i was in new york and i felt the fear nevertheless there was so much human courage so much love and so much compassion .
and then as i went around the country after that and felt the fear the fear that was leading to people feeling they couldn t worry about the environment any more in case they seemed not to be patriotic and i was trying to encourage them 
somebody came up with a little quotation from mahatma gandhi if you look back through human history you see that every evil regime has been overcome by good . 
and just after that a woman brought me this little bell and i want to end on this note .
she said if you re talking about hope and peace ring this .
this bell is made from metal from a defused landmine from the killing fields of pol pot one of the most evil regimes in human history where people are now beginning to put their lives back together after the regime has crumbled .
so yes there is hope and where is the hope ?
is it out there with the politicians ?
it s in our hands .
it s in your hands and my hands and those of our children .
it s really up to us .
we re the ones who can make a difference .
if we lead lives where we consciously leave the lightest possible ecological footprints if we buy the things that are ethical for us to buy and don t buy the things that are not we can change the world overnight .
thank you .
thank you . it s really an honor and a privilege to be here spending my last day as a teenager .
today i want to talk to you about the future but first i m going to tell you a bit about the past .
my story starts way before i was born .
my grandmother was on a train to auschwitz the death camp .
and she was going along the tracks and the tracks split .
and somehow we don t really know exactly the whole story but the train took the wrong track and went to a work camp rather than the death camp .
my grandmother survived and married my grandfather .
they were living in hungary and my mother was born .
and when my mother was two years old the hungarian revolution was raging and they decided to escape hungary .
they got on a boat and yet another divergence the boat was either going to canada or to australia .
they got on and didn t know where they were going and ended up in canada .
so to make a long story short they came to canada .
my grandmother was a chemist . she worked at the banting institute in toronto 
and at she died of stomach cancer . i never met my grandmother but i carry on her name her exact name eva vertes and i like to think i carry on her scientific passion too .
i found this passion not far from here actually when i was nine years old .
my family was on a road trip and we were in the grand canyon .
and i had never been a reader when i was young 
my dad had tried me with the hardy boys i tried nancy drew i tried all that and i just didn t like reading books .
and my mother bought this book when we were at the grand canyon called the hot zone . it was all about the outbreak of the ebola virus .
and something about it just kind of drew me towards it .
there was this big sort of bumpy looking virus on the cover 
i was a passive observer of the medical world .
it wasn t until i entered high school that i thought maybe now you know being a big high school kid i can maybe become an active part of this big medical world . 
i was and i emailed professors at the local university to see if maybe i could go work in their lab . and hardly anyone responded .
but i mean why would they respond to a year old anyway ?
and i got to go talk to one professor dr . jacobs who accepted me into the lab .
at that time i was really interested in neuroscience
and wanted to do a research project in neurology specifically looking at the effects of heavy metals on the developing nervous system .
so i started that and worked in his lab for a year 
and found the results that i guess you d expect to find when you feed fruit flies heavy metals that it really really impaired the nervous system .
the spinal cord had breaks . the neurons were crossing in every which way .
and from then i wanted to look not at impairment but at prevention of impairment .
so that s what led me to alzheimer s . i started reading about alzheimer s and tried to familiarize myself with the research 
and at the same time when i was in the i was reading in the medical library one day and i read this article about something called purine derivatives . 
and they seemed to have cell growth promoting properties .
and being naive about the whole field i kind of thought oh you have cell death in alzheimer s which is causing the memory deficit and then you have this compound purine derivatives that are promoting cell growth . 
and so i thought maybe if it can promote cell growth it can inhibit cell death too . 
and so that s the project that i pursued for that year and it s continuing now as well and found that a specific purine derivative called guanidine had inhibited the cell growth by approximately percent .
so i presented those results at the international science fair which was just one of the most amazing experiences of my life .
and there i was awarded best in the world in medicine which allowed me to get in or at least get a foot in the door of the big medical world .
and from then on since i was now in this huge exciting world i wanted to explore it all . i wanted it all at once but knew i couldn t really get that .
and i stumbled across something called cancer stem cells . 
and this is really what i want to talk to you about today about cancer .
at first when i heard of cancer stem cells i didn t really know how to put the two together . i d heard of stem cells and i d heard of them as the panacea of the future the therapy of many diseases to come in the future perhaps .
but i d heard of cancer as the most feared disease of our time so how did the good and bad go together ?
last summer i worked at stanford university doing some research on cancer stem cells .
and while i was doing this i was reading the cancer literature trying to again familiarize myself with this new medical field .
and it seemed that tumors actually begin from a stem cell .
this fascinated me . the more i read the more i looked at cancer differently and almost became less fearful of it .
it seems that cancer is a direct result to injury .
if you smoke you damage your lung tissue and then lung cancer arises .
if you drink you damage your liver and then liver cancer occurs .
and it was really interesting there were articles correlating because what stem cells are they re these phenomenal cells that really have the ability to differentiate into any type of tissue .
so if the body is sensing that you have damage to an organ and then it s initiating cancer it s almost as if this is a repair response .
and the cancer the body is saying the lung tissue is damaged we need to repair the lung . and cancer is originating in the lung trying to repair because you have this excessive proliferation of these remarkable cells that really have the potential to become lung tissue .
but it s almost as if the body has originated this ingenious response but can t quite control it .
it hasn t yet become fine tuned enough to finish what has been initiated .
so this really really fascinated me .
and i really think that we can t think about cancer let alone any disease in such black and white terms .
if we eliminate cancer the way we re trying to do now with chemotherapy and radiation we re bombarding the body or the cancer with toxins or with radiation trying to kill it .
it s almost as if we re getting back to this starting point .
we re removing the cancer cells but we re revealing the previous damage that the body has tried to fix .
shouldn t we think about manipulation rather than elimination ?
if somehow we can cause these cells to differentiate to become bone tissue lung tissue liver tissue whatever that cancer has been put there to do it would be a repair process . we d end up better than we were before cancer .
so this really changed my view of looking at cancer .
but it struck me that i d never heard of cancer of the heart or cancer of any skeletal muscle for that matter .
and skeletal muscle constitutes percent of our body or over percent of our body . and so at first i kind of thought well maybe there s some obvious explanation why skeletal muscle doesn t get cancer at least not that i know of . 
so i looked further into it found as many articles as i could and it was amazing because it turned out that it was very rare .
some articles even went as far as to say that skeletal muscle tissue is resistant to cancer and furthermore not only to cancer but of metastases going to skeletal muscle .
and what metastases are is when the tumor when a piece breaks off and travels through the blood stream and goes to a different organ . that s what a metastasis is .
it s the part of cancer that is the most dangerous .
if cancer was localized we could likely remove it 
or somehow you know it s contained . it s very contained .
but once it starts moving throughout the body that s when it becomes deadly .
so the fact that not only did cancer not seem to originate in skeletal muscles but cancer didn t seem to go to skeletal muscle there seemed to be something here .
so these articles were saying you know skeletal metastasis to skeletal muscle is very rare . 
but it was left at that . no one seemed to be asking why .
meaning that you have muscle cells but they re not dividing so it doesn t seem like a good target for cancer to hijack .
but then again this fact that the metastases didn t go to skeletal muscle made that seem unlikely .
and furthermore that nervous tissue brain gets cancer and brain cells are also terminally differentiated .
so i decided to ask why . and here s some of i guess my hypotheses that i ll be starting to investigate this may at the sylvester cancer institute in miami .
and i guess i ll keep investigating until i get the answers .
but i know that in science once you get the answers inevitably you re going to have more questions .
so i guess you could say that i ll probably be doing this for the rest of my life .
some of my hypotheses are that when you first think about skeletal muscle there s a lot of blood vessels going to skeletal muscle .
and the first thing that makes me think is that blood vessels are like highways for the tumor cells .
tumor cells can travel through the blood vessels .
and you think the more highways there are in a tissue the more likely it is to get cancer or to get metastases .
so first of all i thought you know wouldn t it be favorable to cancer getting to skeletal muscle ? and as well 
cancer tumors require a process called angiogenesis which is really the tumor recruits the blood vessels to itself to supply itself with nutrients so it can grow .
without angiogenesis the tumor remains the size of a pinpoint and it s not harmful .
so angiogenesis is really a central process to the pathogenesis of cancer .
and one article that really stood out to me when i was just reading about this trying to figure out why cancer doesn t go to skeletal
muscle was that it had reported percent of micro metastases to skeletal muscle upon autopsy .
 percent ! meaning that there were these pinpoint tumors in skeletal muscle but only . percent of actual metastases 
suggesting that maybe skeletal muscle is able to control the angiogenesis is able to control the tumors recruiting these blood vessels .
we use skeletal muscles so much . it s the one portion of our body our heart s always beating . we re always moving our muscles .
is it possible that muscle somehow intuitively knows that it needs this blood supply ? it needs to be constantly contracting so therefore it s almost selfish . it s grabbing its blood vessels for itself .
therefore when a tumor comes into skeletal muscle tissue it can t get a blood supply and can t grow .
so this suggests that maybe if there is an anti angiogenic factor in skeletal muscle or perhaps even more an angiogenic routing factor so it can actually direct where the blood vessels grow 
this could be a potential future therapy for cancer .
and another thing that s really interesting is that there s this whole the way tumors move throughout the body it s a very complex system and there s something called the chemokine network .
and chemokines are essentially chemical attractants and they re the stop and go signals for cancer .
so a tumor expresses chemokine receptors and another organ a distant organ somewhere in the body will have the corresponding chemokines and the tumor will see these chemokines and migrate towards it .
is it possible that skeletal muscle doesn t express this type of molecules ?
and the other really interesting thing is that when skeletal muscle there s been several reports that when skeletal muscle is injured that s what correlates with metastases going to skeletal muscle .
and furthermore when skeletal muscle is injured that s what causes chemokines these signals saying cancer you can come to me the go signs for the tumors 
it causes them to highly express these chemokines .
so there s so much interplay here . i mean there are so many possibilities for why tumors don t go to skeletal muscle .
but it seems like by investigating by attacking cancer by searching where cancer is not there has got to be something there s got to be something that s making this tissue resistant to tumors .
and can we utilize can we take this property this compound this receptor whatever it is that s controlling these anti tumor properties and apply it to cancer therapy in general ?
now one thing that kind of ties the resistance of skeletal muscle to cancer to the cancer as a repair response gone out of control in the body is that skeletal muscle has a factor in it called myod . 
and what myod essentially does is it causes cells to differentiate into muscle cells . so this compound myod has been tested on a lot of different cell types and been shown to actually convert this variety of cell types into skeletal muscle cells .
so is it possible that the tumor cells are going to the skeletal muscle tissue but once in contact inside the skeletal muscle tissue myod acts upon these tumor cells and causes them to become skeletal muscle cells ?
maybe tumor cells are being disguised as skeletal muscle cells and this is why it seems as if it is so rare .
it s not harmful it has just repaired the muscle .
muscle is constantly being used constantly being damaged .
if every time we tore a muscle or every time we stretched a muscle or moved in a wrong way cancer occurred i mean everybody would have cancer almost .
it s different when a bacteria comes into the body that s a foreign object we want that out .
but when the body is actually initiating a process and we re calling it a disease it doesn t seem as though elimination is the right solution . so even to go from there it s possible although far fetched that in the future we could almost think of cancer being used as a therapy .
if those diseases where tissues are deteriorating for example alzheimer s where the brain the brain cells die and we need to restore new brain cells new functional brain cells what if we could in the future use cancer ? a tumor 
put it in the brain and cause it to differentiate into brain cells ?
that s a very far fetched idea but i really believe that it may be possible .
these cells are so versatile these cancer cells are so versatile we just have to manipulate them in the right way .
and again some of these may be far fetched but i figured if there s anywhere to present far fetched ideas it s here at ted so thank you very much .
frank gehry i listened to this scientist this morning .
dr . mullis was talking about his experiments and i realized that i almost became a scientist .
when i was my parents bought me a chemistry set and i decided to make water .
so i made a hydrogen generator and i made an oxygen generator and i had the two pipes leading into a beaker and i threw a match in .
and the glass luckily i turned around i had it all in my back and i was about feet away .
the wall was covered with . . . i had an explosion .
richard saul wurman really ?
fg people on the street came and knocked on the door
to see if i was okay .
rsw . . . huh . i d like to start this session again .
the gentleman to my left is the very famous perhaps overly famous frank gehry .
and frank you ve come to a place in your life which is astonishing .
i mean it is astonishing for an artist for an architect to become actually an icon and a legend in their own time .
i mean you have become whether you can giggle at it because it s a funny . . . you know it s a strange thought but your building is an icon 
you can draw a little picture of that building it can be used in ads 
and you ve had not rock star status but celebrity status in doing what you wanted to do for most of your life .
and i know the road was extremely difficult .
and it didn t seem at least that your sell outs whatever they were were very big .
you kept moving ahead in a life where you re dependent on working for somebody .
but that s an interesting thing for a creative person .
a lot of us work for people we re in the hands of other people .
and that s one of the great dilemmas we re in a creativity session it s one of the great dilemmas in creativity how to do work that s big enough and not sell out .
and you ve achieved that and that makes your win doubly big triply big .
it s not quite a question but you can comment on it .
it s a big issue .
fg well i ve always just . . .
i ve never really gone out looking for work .
i always waited for it to sort of hit me on the head .
and when i started out i thought that architecture was a service business and that you had to please the clients and stuff .
and i realized when i d come into the meetings with these corrugated metal and chain link stuff and people would just look at me like i d just landed from mars .
but i couldn t do anything else .
that was my response to the people in the time .
and actually it was responding to clients that i had who didn t have very much money so they couldn t afford very much .
i think it was circumstantial .
until i got to my house where the client was my wife .
we bought this tiny little bungalow in santa monica and for like grand i built a house around it .
and a few people got excited about it .
i was visiting with an artist michael heizer out in the desert near las vegas somewhere .
he s building this huge concrete place .
and it was late in the evening . we d had a lot to drink .
we were standing out in the desert all alone and thinking about my house he said did it ever occur to you if you built stuff more permanent somewhere in years somebody s going to like it ? 
so i thought yeah that s probably a good idea . 
luckily i started to get some clients that had a little more money so the stuff was a little more permanent .
but i just found out the world ain t going to last that long this guy was telling us the other day .
so where do we go now ?
back to everything s so temporary .
i don t see it the way you characterized it .
for me every day is a new thing .
i approach each project with a new insecurity almost like the first project i ever did 
and i get the sweats i go in and start working i m not sure where i m going if i knew where i was going i wouldn t do it .
when i can predict or plan it i don t do it .
i discard it .
so i approach it with the same trepidation .
obviously over time i have a lot more confidence that it s going to be ok .
i do run a kind of a business 
i ve got people and you ve got to pay them so there s a lot of responsibility involved 
but the actual work on the project is with i think a healthy insecurity .
and like the playwright said the other day i could relate to him you re not sure .
when bilbao was finished and i looked at it i saw all the mistakes i saw . . .
they weren t mistakes 
i saw everything that i would have changed and i was embarrassed by it .
i felt an embarrassment how could i have done that ?
how could i have made shapes like that or done stuff like that ? 
it s taken several years to now look at it detached and say 
as you walk around the corner and a piece of it works with the road and the street and it appears to have a relationship that i started to like it .
rsw what s the status of the new york project ?
fg i don t really know .
tom krens came to me with bilbao and explained it all to me and i thought he was nuts .
i didn t think he knew what he was doing and he pulled it off .
so i think he s icarus and phoenix all in one guy .
he gets up there and then he . . . comes back up .
they re still talking about it .
september generated some interest in moving it over to ground zero and i m totally against that .
i just feel uncomfortable talking about or building anything on ground zero i think for a long time .
rsw the picture on the screen is that disney ?
fg yeah .
rsw how much further along is it than that and when will that be finished ?
fg that will be finished in september october 
and i m hoping kyu and herbie and yo yo and all those guys come play with us at that place .
luckily today most of the people i m working with are people i really like .
richard koshalek is probably one of the main reasons that disney hall came to me .
he s been a cheerleader for quite a long time .
there aren t many people around that are really involved with architecture as clients .
if you think about the world and even just in this audience most of us are involved with buildings . nothing that you would call architecture right ?
and so to find one a guy like that you hang on to him .
he s become the head of art center and there s a building by craig ellwood there .
i knew craig and respected him .
they want to add to it and it s hard to add to a building like that 
it s a beautiful minimalist black steel building and richard wants to add a library and more student stuff
and it s a lot of acreage .
i convinced him to let me bring in another architect from portugal alvaro siza .
rsw why did you want that ? fg i knew you d ask that question .
it was intuitive .
alvaro siza grew up and lived in portugal and is probably considered the portuguese main guy in architecture .
i visited with him a few years ago
and he showed me his early work and his early work had a resemblance to my early work .
when i came out of college i started to try to do things contextually in southern california and you got into the logic of spanish colonial tile roofs and things like that .
i tried to understand that language as a beginning as a place to jump off 
and there was so much of it being done by spec builders and it was trivialized so much that it wasn t . . .
i just stopped .
i mean charlie moore did a bunch of it but it didn t feel good to me .
siza on the other hand continued in portugal where the real stuff was
and evolved a modern language that relates to that historic language .
and i always felt that he should come to southern california and do a building .
i tried to get him a couple of jobs and they didn t pan out .
i like the idea of collaboration with people like that because it pushes you .
i ve done it with claes oldenburg and with richard serra who doesn t think architecture is art .
did you see that thing ?
rsw no . what did he say ?
fg he calls architecture plumbing . 
fg anyway the siza thing . it s a richer experience .
it must be like that for kyu doing things with musicians 
it s similar to that i would imagine where you . . . huh ?
audience liquid architecture .
fg liquid architecture .
where you . . . it s like jazz you improvise you work together you play off each other you make something they make something .
and i think
for me it s a way of trying to understand the city and what might happen in the city .
rsw is it going to be near the current campus ?
or is it going to be down near . . .
fg no it s near the current campus .
anyway he s that kind of patron .
it s not his money of course .
rsw what s his schedule on that ?
fg i don t know .
what s the schedule richard ?
richard koshalek unclear starts from .
fg .
you can come to the opening . i ll invite you .
no but the issue of city building in democracy is interesting because it creates chaos right ?
everybody doing their thing makes a very chaotic environment and if you can figure out how to work off each other 
rsw i found the most remarkable thing .
my preconception of bilbao was this wonderful building you go inside and there d be extraordinary spaces . i d seen drawings you had presented here at ted .
the surprise of bilbao was in its context to the city .
that was the surprise of going across the river of going on the highway around it of walking down the street and finding it .
that was the real surprise of bilbao .
fg but you know richard most architects when they present their work most of the people we know 
blah blah blah and all that stuff .
and it s like cleansing yourself so that you can . . .
by saying all that it means your work is good somehow .
and i think everybody 
i mean that should be a matter of fact like gravity .
you re not going to defy gravity .
you ve got to work with the building department .
if you don t meet the budgets you re not going to get much work .
if it leaks 
bilbao did not leak .
i was so proud .
the mit project they were interviewing me for mit and they sent their facilities people to bilbao .
i met them in bilbao .
they came for three days .
rsw this is the computer building ?
fg yeah the computer building .
they were there three days and it rained every day
and they kept walking around i noticed they were looking under things and looking for things 
and they wanted to know where the buckets were hidden you know ? people put buckets out . . .
i was clean . there wasn t a bloody leak in the place it was just fantastic .
but you ve got to 
yeah well up until then every building leaked so this . . .
rsw frank had a sort of . . .
fg ask miriam !
rw . . . sort of had a fame . his fame was built on that in l .a . for a while .
fg you ve all heard the frank lloyd wright story when the woman called and said mr . wright i m sitting on the couch and the water s pouring in on my head . 
and he said madam move your chair . 
so some years later i was doing a building a little house on the beach for norton simon and his secretary who was kind of a hell on wheels type lady called me and said mr . simon s sitting at his desk and the water s coming in on his head . 
and i told her the frank lloyd wright story .
rsw didn t get a laugh .
fg no . not now either .
but my point is that . . . and i call it the then what ? ok you solved all the problems you did all the stuff you made nice you loved your clients you loved the city you re a good guy you re a good person . . .
and then what ? what do you bring to it ?
and i think that s what i ve always been interested in is that which is a personal kind of expression .
bilbao i think shows that you can have that kind of personal expression and still touch all the bases that are necessary of fitting into the city .
that s what reminded me of it .
and i think that s the issue you know it s the then what that most clients who hire architects 
most clients aren t hiring architects for that .
they re hiring them to get it done get it on budget be polite and they re missing out on the real value of an architect .
rsw at a certain point a number of years ago people when michael graves was a fashion before teapots . . .
fg i did a teapot and nobody bought it .
rsw did it leak ?
fg no .
rsw . . . people wanted a michael graves building .
is that a curse that people want a bilbao building ?
fg yeah .
since bilbao opened which is now four five years both krens and i have been called with at least opportunities 
china brazil other parts of spain 
to come in and do the bilbao effect .
and i ve met with some of these people .
usually i say no right away but some of them come with pedigree and they sound well intentioned and they get you for at least one or two meetings .
in one case i flew all the way to malaga with a team because the thing was signed with seals and various very official seals from the city 
and that they wanted me to come and do a building in their port .
i asked them what kind of building it was .
 when you get here we ll explain it . blah blah blah .
so four of us went .
and they took us they put us up in a great hotel and we were looking over the bay 
and then they took us in a boat out in the water and showed us all these sights in the harbor . each one was more beautiful than the other .
and then we were going to have lunch with the mayor and we were going to have dinner with the most important people in malaga .
just before going to lunch with the mayor we went to the harbor commissioner .
it was a table as long as this carpet and the harbor commissioner was here and i was here and my guys .
we sat down and we had a drink of water and everybody was quiet .
and the guy looked at me and said now what can i do for you mr . gehry ? 
rsw oh my god .
fg so i got up .
i said to my team let s get out of here . 
we stood up we walked out .
they followed the guy that dragged us there followed us and he said you mean you re not going to have lunch with the mayor ? 
i said nope . 
 you re not going to have dinner at all ? 
they just brought us there to hustle this group you know to create a project .
and we get a lot of that .
luckily i m old enough that i can complain i can t travel .
i don t have my own plane yet .
rsw well i m going to wind this up and wind up the meeting because it s been very long .
but let me just say a couple words .
fg can i say something ?
are you going to talk about me or you ?
rsw once a shit always a shit !
fg because i want to get a standing ovation like everybody so . . .
rsw you re going to get one ! you re going to get one !
i m going to make it for you !
fg no no . wait a minute !
imagine spending seven years at mit and research laboratories only to find out that you re a performance artist .
i m also a software engineer and i make lots of different kinds of art with the computer .
and i think the main thing that i m interested in is trying to find a way of making the computer into a personal mode of expression .
and many of you out there are the heads of macromedia and microsoft and in a way those are my bane 
i think there s a great homogenizing force that software imposes on people and limits the way they think about what s possible on the computer .
of course it s also a great liberating force that makes possible you know publishing and so forth and standards and so on .
but in a way the computer makes possible much more than what most people think and my art has just been about trying to find a personal way of using the computer and so i end up writing software to do that .
chris has asked me to do a short performance and so i m going to take just this time maybe minutes to do that and hopefully at the end have just a moment to show you a couple of my other projects in video form .
thank you .
we ve got about a minute left .
i d just like to show a clip from a most recent project .
i did a performance with two singers who specialize in making strange noises with their mouths .
and this just came off last september at ars electronica we repeated it in england .
and the idea is to visualize their speech and song behind them with a large screen .
we used a computer vision tracking system in order to know where they were .
and since we know where their heads are and we have a wireless mic on them that we re processing the sound from we re able to create visualizations which are linked very tightly to what they re doing with their speech .
this will take about seconds or so .
he s making a kind of cheek flapping sound .
well suffice it to say it s not all like that but that s part of it .
thanks very much . there s always lots more .
i m overtime so i just wanted to say you can if you re in new york you can check out my work at the whitney biennial next week and also at bitforms gallery in chelsea .
and with that i think i should give up the stage 
so thank you so much .
i d like to talk today about the two biggest social trends in the coming century and perhaps in the next years .
but i want to start with my work on romantic love because that s my most recent work .
what i and my colleagues did was put people who were madly in love into a functional mri brain scanner .
 who were madly in love and their love was accepted and who were madly in love and they had just been dumped .
and so i want to tell you about that first and then go on into where i think love is going .
 what tis to love ? shakespeare said .
i think our ancestors i think human beings have been wondering about this question since they sat around their campfires or lay and watched the stars a million years ago .
i started out by trying to figure out what romantic love was by looking at the last years of the psychological research and as it turns out there s a very specific group of things that happen when you fall in love .
the first thing that happens is a person begins to take on what i call special meaning . 
as a truck driver once said to me the world had a new center and that center was mary anne . 
george bernard shaw said it differently .
 love consists of overestimating the differences between one woman and another . 
and indeed that s what we do . and then you just focus on this person .
you can list what you don t like about them but then you sweep that aside and focus on what you do .
as chaucer said love is blind . 
in trying to understand romantic love i decided i would read poetry from all over the world and i just want to give you one very short poem from eighth century china because it s an almost perfect example of a man who is focused totally on a particular woman .
it s a little bit like when you are madly in love with somebody and you walk into a parking lot 
their car is different from every other car in the parking lot .
their wine glass at dinner is different from every other wine glass at the dinner party .
and in this case a man got hooked on a bamboo sleeping mat .
and it goes like this . it s by a guy called yuan zhen . i cannot bear to put away the bamboo sleeping mat .
the night i brought you home i watched you roll it out . 
he became hooked on a sleeping mat probably because of elevated activity of dopamine in his brain just like with you and me .
but anyway not only does this person take on special meaning you focus your attention on them . you aggrandize them .
but you have intense energy .
as one polynesian said i felt like jumping in the sky . 
you re up all night . you re walking till dawn .
you feel intense elation when things are going well mood swings into horrible despair when things are going poorly .
real dependence on this person .
as one businessman in new york said to me anything she liked i liked . 
simple . romantic love is very simple .
you become extremely sexually possessive .
you know if you re just sleeping with somebody casually you don t really care if they re sleeping with somebody else .
but the moment you fall in love you become extremely sexually possessive of them .
i think there s a darwinian purpose to this .
the whole point of this is to pull two people together strongly enough to begin to rear babies as a team .
but the main characteristics of romantic love are craving an intense craving to be with a particular person not just sexually but emotionally .
it would be nice to go to bed with them but you want them to call you on the telephone to invite you out etc . 
to tell you that they love you .
the other main characteristic is motivation .
the motor in the brain begins to crank and you want this person .
and last but not least it is an obsession .
before i put these people in the mri machine i would ask them all kinds of questions .
but my most important question was always the same .
it was what percentage of the day and night do you think about this person ? 
and indeed they would say all day . all night . i can never stop thinking about him or her . 
and then the very last question i would always have to work myself up to this question because i m not a psychologist .
i don t work with people in any kind of traumatic situation .
my final question was always the same .
i would say would you die for him or her ? 
and indeed these people would say yes ! as if i had asked them to pass the salt .
i was just staggered by it .
so we scanned their brains looking at a photograph of their sweetheart and looking at a neutral photograph with a distraction task in between .
so we could look at the same brain when it was in that heightened state and when it was in a resting state .
and we found activity in a lot of brain regions .
in fact one of the most important was a brain region that becomes active when you feel the rush of cocaine .
and indeed that s exactly what happens .
i began to realize that romantic love is not an emotion .
in fact i had always thought it was a series of emotions from very high to very low .
but actually it s a drive . it comes from the motor of the mind the wanting part of the mind the craving part of the mind .
the kind of part of the mind when you re reaching for that piece of chocolate when you want to win that promotion at work .
the motor of the brain . it s a drive .
and in fact i think it s more powerful than the sex drive .
you know if you ask somebody to go to bed with you and they say no thank you you certainly don t kill yourself or slip into a clinical depression .
but certainly around the world people who are rejected in love will kill for it .
people live for love . they kill for love . they die for love .
they have songs poems novels sculptures paintings myths legends .
in over societies people have left their evidence of this powerful brain system .
i have come to think it s one of the most powerful brain systems on earth for both great joy and great sorrow .
and i ve also come to think that it s one of three basically different brain systems that evolved from mating and reproduction .
one is the sex drive the craving for sexual gratification .
w .h . auden called it an intolerable neural itch and indeed that s what it is .
it keeps bothering you a little bit like being hungry .
the second of these three brain systems is romantic love that elation obsession of early love .
and the third brain system is attachment that sense of calm and security you can feel for a long term partner .
and i think that the sex drive evolved to get you out there looking for a whole range of partners .
you can feel it when you re just driving along in your car .
it can be focused on nobody .
and i think that attachment the third brain system evolved to enable you to tolerate this human being at least long enough to raise a child together as a team .
so with that preamble i want to go into discussing the two most profound social trends .
one of the last years and the other certainly of the last years that are going to have an impact on these three different brain systems lust romantic love and deep attachment to a partner .
the first is women working moving into the workforce .
i ve looked at societies through the demographic yearbooks of the united nations .
it s very slow .
for every trend on this planet there s a counter trend .
we all know of them but nevertheless 
the arabs say the dogs may bark but the caravan moves on . 
and indeed that caravan is moving on .
women are moving back into the job market .
and i say back into the job market because this is not new .
for millions of years on the grasslands of africa women commuted to work to gather their vegetables .
they came home with to percent of the evening meal .
the double income family was the standard .
and women were regarded as just as economically socially and sexually powerful as men .
in short we re really moving forward to the past .
then women s worst invention was the plow .
with the beginning of plow agriculture men s roles became extremely powerful .
women lost their ancient jobs as collectors but then with the industrial revolution and the post industrial revolution they re moving back into the job market .
in short they are acquiring the status that they had a million years ago years ago years ago .
we are seeing now one of the most remarkable traditions in the history of the human animal .
and it s going to have an impact .
i generally give a whole lecture on the impact of women on the business community .
i ll say just a couple of things and then go on to sex and love .
there s a lot of gender differences anybody who thinks men and women are alike simply never had a boy and a girl child .
i don t know why they want to think that men and women are alike .
there s much we have in common but there s a whole lot that we do not have in common .
we are in the words of ted hughes i think that we are like two feet . we need each other to get ahead . 
but we did not evolve to have the same brain .
and we re finding more and more gender differences in the brain .
i ll only just use a couple and then move on to sex and love .
one of them is women s verbal ability . women can talk .
women s ability to find the right word rapidly basic articulation goes up in the middle of the menstrual cycle when estrogen levels peak .
but even at menstruation they re better than the average man .
women can talk .
they ve been doing it for a million years words were women s tools .
they held that baby in front of their face cajoling it reprimanding it educating it with words .
and indeed they re becoming a very powerful force .
even in places like india and japan where women are not moving rapidly into the regular job market they re moving into journalism .
and i think that the television is like the global campfire .
we sit around it and it shapes our minds .
almost always when i m on tv the producer who calls me who negotiates what we re going to say is a woman .
in fact solzhenitsyn once said to have a great writer is to have another government . 
today percent of people who are writers in america are women .
it s one of many many characteristics that women have that they will bring into the job market .
they ve got incredible people skills negotiating skills .
they re highly imaginative .
we now know the brain circuitry of imagination of long term planning .
they tend to be web thinkers .
because the female parts of the brain are better connected they tend to collect more pieces of data when they think put them into more complex patterns see more options and outcomes .
they tend to be contextual holistic thinkers what i call web thinkers .
men tend to and these are averages tend to get rid of what they regard as extraneous focus on what they do and move in a more step by step thinking pattern .
they re both perfectly good ways of thinking .
we need both of them to get ahead .
in fact there s many more male geniuses in the world .
and there s also many more male idiots in the world . when the male brain works well it works extremely well .
and what i really think that we re doing is we re moving towards a collaborative society 
a society in which the talents of both men and women are becoming understood and valued and employed .
but in fact women moving into the job market is having a huge impact on sex and romance and family life .
foremost women are starting to express their sexuality .
i m always astonished when people come to me and say why is it that men are so adulterous ? 
 why do you think more men are adulterous than women ? 
 well men are more adulterous ! 
and i say who do you think these men are sleeping with ? 
and basic math ! anyway .
in the western world women start sooner at sex have more partners express less remorse for the partners that they do marry later have fewer children leave bad marriages in order to get good ones .
we are seeing the rise of female sexual expression .
and indeed once again we re moving forward to the kind of sexual expression that we probably saw on the grasslands of africa a million years ago because this is the kind of sexual expression that we see in hunting and gathering societies today .
we re also returning to an ancient form of marriage equality .
they re now saying that the st century is going to be the century of what they call the symmetrical marriage or the pure marriage or the companionate marriage . 
this is a marriage between equals moving forward to a pattern that is highly compatible with the ancient human spirit .
we re also seeing a rise of romantic love .
 percent of american women and percent of american men would not marry somebody who had every single quality they were looking for in a partner if they were not in love with that person .
people around the world in a study of societies want to be in love with the person that they marry .
indeed arranged marriages are on their way off this braid of human life .
i even think that marriages might even become more stable because of the second great world trend .
the first one being women moving into the job market the second one being the aging world population .
they re now saying that in america that middle age should be regarded as up to age .
because in that highest age category of to as much as percent of people have nothing really wrong with them .
so we re seeing there s a real extension of middle age .
for one of my books i looked at divorce data in societies .
and as it turns out the older you get the less likely you are to divorce .
so the divorce rate right now is stable in america and it s actually beginning to decline .
it may decline some more .
i would even say that with viagra and the incredibly interesting women women have never been as interesting as they are now .
not at any time on this planet have women been so educated so interesting so capable .
and so i honestly think that if there really was ever a time in human evolution when we have the opportunity to make good marriages that time is now .
however there s always kinds of complications in this .
these three brain systems lust romantic love and attachment don t always go together .
they can go together by the way .
that s why casual sex isn t so casual .
with orgasm you get a spike of dopamine .
dopamine s associated with romantic love and you can just fall in love with somebody who you re just having casual sex with .
with orgasm then you get a real rush of oxytocin and vasopressin those are associated with attachment .
this is why you can feel such a sense of cosmic union with somebody after you ve made love to them .
but these three brain systems lust romantic love and attachment aren t always connected to each other .
you can feel deep attachment to a long term partner while you feel intense romantic love for somebody else while you feel the sex drive for people unrelated to these other partners .
in short we re capable of loving more than one person at a time .
in fact you can lie in bed at night and swing from deep feelings of attachment for one person to deep feelings of romantic love for somebody else .
it s as if there s a committee meeting going on in your head as you are trying to decide what to do .
so i don t think honestly we re an animal that was built to be happy we are an animal that was built to reproduce .
i think the happiness we find we make .
and i think however we can make good relationships with each other .
so i want to conclude with two things .
i want to conclude with a worry 
and with a wonderful story .
the worry is about antidepressants .
over million prescriptions of antidepressants are written every year in the united states .
and these drugs are going generic .
they are seeping around the world .
i know one girl who s been on these antidepressants ssris serotonin enhancing antidepressants since she was .
she s . she s been on them ever since she was .
i ve got nothing against people who take them short term when they re going through something horrible .
they want to commit suicide or kill somebody else .
i would recommend it .
but more and more people in the united states are taking them long term .
and indeed what these drugs do is raise levels of serotonin .
and by raising levels of serotonin you suppress the dopamine circuit .
everybody knows that .
dopamine is associated with romantic love .
not only do they suppress the dopamine circuit but they kill the sex drive .
and when you kill the sex drive you kill orgasm .
and when you kill orgasm you kill that flood of drugs associated with attachment .
the things are connected in the brain .
and when you tamper with one brain system you re going to tamper with another .
i m just simply saying that a world without love is a deadly place .
so now thank you .
i want to end with a story . and then just a comment .
i ve been studying romantic love and sex and attachment for years .
i m an identical twin i am interested in why we re all alike .
why you and i are alike why the iraqis and the japanese and the australian aborigines and the people of the amazon river are all alike .
and about a year ago an internet dating service match .com came to me and asked me if i would design a new dating site for them .
i said i don t know anything about personality . you know ?
i don t know . do you think you ve got the right person ? 
they said yes . 
it got me thinking about why it is that you fall in love with one person rather than another .
that s my current project it will be my next book .
there s all kinds of reasons that you fall in love with one person rather than another .
timing is important . proximity is important .
mystery is important . you fall in love with somebody who s somewhat mysterious in part because mystery elevates dopamine in the brain probably pushes you over that threshold to fall in love .
you fall in love with somebody who fits within what i call your love map an unconscious list of traits that you build in childhood as you grow up .
and i also think that you gravitate to certain people actually with somewhat complementary brain systems .
and that s what i m now contributing to this .
but i want to tell you a story to illustrate .
i ve been carrying on here about the biology of love .
i wanted to show you a little bit about the culture of it too the magic of it .
it s a story that was told to me by somebody who had heard it just from one probably a true story .
it was a graduate student i m at rutgers and my two colleagues art aron is at suny stony brook .
that s where we put our people in the mri machine .
and this graduate student was madly in love with another graduate student and she was not in love with him .
and they were all at a conference in beijing .
and he knew from our work that if you go and do something very novel with somebody you can drive up the dopamine in the brain 
and perhaps trigger this brain system for romantic love . so he decided he d put science to work . and he invited this girl to go off on a rickshaw ride with him .
and sure enough i ve never been in one but apparently they go all around the buses and the trucks and it s crazy and it s noisy and it s exciting .
he figured that this would drive up the dopamine and she d fall in love with him .
so off they go and she s squealing and squeezing him and laughing and having a wonderful time .
an hour later they get down off of the rickshaw and she throws her hands up and she says wasn t that wonderful ? 
and wasn t that rickshaw driver handsome ! 
there s magic to love !
but i will end by saying that millions of years ago we evolved three basic drives the sex drive romantic love and attachment to a long term partner .
these circuits are deeply embedded in the human brain .
they re going to survive as long as our species survives on what shakespeare called this mortal coil . 
thank you . chris anderson helen fisher !
it is a thrill to be here at a conference that s devoted to inspired by nature you can imagine .
and i m also thrilled to be in the foreplay section .
did you notice this section is foreplay ?
because i get to talk about one of my favorite critters which is the western grebe . you haven t lived until you ve seen these guys do their courtship dance .
i was on bowman lake in glacier national park which is a long skinny lake with sort of mountains upside down in it 
and my partner and i have a rowing shell .
and so we were rowing and one of these western grebes came along .
and what they do for their courtship dance is they go together the two of them the two mates and they begin to run underwater .
they paddle faster and faster and faster until they re going so fast that they literally lift up out of the water 
and they re standing upright sort of paddling the top of the water .
and one of these grebes came along while we were rowing .
and so we re in a skull and we re moving really really quickly .
and this grebe i think sort of mistaked us for a prospect 
and started to run along the water next to us in a courtship dance for miles .
it would stop and then start and then stop and then start .
now that is foreplay .
i came this close to changing species at that moment .
obviously life can teach us something in the entertainment section . life has a lot to teach us .
but what i d like to talk about today is what life might teach us in technology and in design .
what s happened since the book came out the book was mainly about research in biomimicry 
and what s happened since then is architects designers engineers people who make our world have started to call and say we want a biologist to sit at the design table to help us in real time become inspired .
or and this is the fun part for me we want you to take us out into the natural world . we ll come with a design challenge and we find the champion adapters in the natural world who might inspire us .
so this is a picture from a galapagos trip that we took
with some wastewater treatment engineers they purify wastewater .
and some of them were very resistant actually to being there .
what they said to us at first was you know we already do biomimicry .
we use bacteria to clean our water . and we said well that s not exactly being inspired by nature .
that s bioprocessing you know that s bio assisted technology 
using an organism to do your wastewater treatment is an old old technology called domestication . 
this is learning something learning an idea from an organism and then applying it .
and so they still weren t getting it .
so we went for a walk on the beach and i said well give me one of your big problems . give me a design challenge 
sustainability speed bump that s keeping you from being sustainable .
and they said scaling which is the build up of minerals inside of pipes .
and they said you know what happens is mineral just like at your house mineral builds up .
and then the aperture closes and we have to flush the pipes with toxins or we have to dig them up .
so if we had some way to stop this scaling 
and so i picked up some shells on the beach . and i asked them what is scaling ? what s inside your pipes ?
and they said calcium carbonate .
and i said that s what this is this is calcium carbonate .
and they didn t know that .
they didn t know that what a seashell is it s templated by proteins and then ions from the seawater crystallize in place to create a shell .
so the same sort of a process without the proteins is happening on the inside of their pipes . they didn t know .
this is not for lack of information it s a lack of integration .
why don t they just keep on going ?
and i said well in the same way that they exude a protein and it starts the crystallization and then they all sort of leaned in they let go of a protein that stops the crystallization .
it literally adheres to the growing face of the crystal .
and in fact there is a product called tpa that s mimicked that protein that stop protein 
and it s an environmentally friendly way to stop scaling in pipes .
that changed everything . from then on you could not get these engineers back in the boat .
the first day they would take a hike and it was click click click click . five minutes later they were back in the boat .
we re done . you know i ve seen that island .
after this they were crawling all over . they would snorkel
for as long as we would let them snorkel .
what had happened was that they realized that there were organisms out there that had already solved the problems that they had spent their careers trying to solve .
learning about the natural world is one thing learning from the natural world that s the switch .
that s the profound switch .
what they realized was that the answers to their questions are everywhere 
they just needed to change the lenses with which they saw the world .
 . billion years of field testing .
 to craig venter will probably tell you 
i think there s a lot more than million well adapted solutions .
the important thing for me is that these are solutions solved in context .
and the context is the earth the same context that we re trying to solve our problems in .
so it s the conscious emulation of life s genius .
it s not slavishly mimicking although al is trying to get the hairdo going it s not a slavish mimicry it s taking the design principles the genius of the natural world and learning something from it .
that s on the software side . but what s interesting to me is that we haven t looked at this as much . i mean these machines are really not very high tech in my estimation in the sense that there s dozens and dozens of carcinogens in the water in silicon valley .
so the hardware is not at all up to snuff in terms of what life would call a success .
so what can we learn about making not just computers but everything ?
the plane you came in cars the seats that you re sitting on .
how do we redesign the world that we make the human made world ?
more importantly what should we ask in the next years ?
and there s a lot of cool technologies out there that life has .
what s the syllabus ?
three questions for me are key .
how does life make things ?
this is the opposite this is how we make things .
it s called heat beat and treat 
that s what material scientists call it .
and it s carving things down from the top with percent waste left over and only percent product . you heat it up you beat it with high pressures you use chemicals . ok . heat beat and treat .
life can t afford to do that . how does life make things ?
how does life make the most of things ?
that s a geranium pollen .
and its shape is what gives it the function of being able to tumble through air so easily . look at that shape .
life adds information to matter .
in other words structure .
it gives it information . by adding information to matter it gives it a function that s different than without that structure .
and thirdly how does life make things disappear into systems ?
because life doesn t really deal in things 
there are no things in the natural world divorced from their systems .
really quick syllabus .
as i m reading more and more now and following the story there are some amazing things coming up in the biological sciences .
and at the same time i m listening to a lot of businesses and finding what their sort of grand challenges are .
the two groups are not talking to each other .
at all .
what in the world of biology might be helpful at this juncture to get us through this sort of evolutionary knothole that we re in ?
i m going to try to go through really quickly .
one that s exciting to me is self assembly .
now you ve heard about this in terms of nanotechnology .
back to that shell the shell is a self assembling material .
on the lower left there is a picture of mother of pearl forming out of seawater . it s a layered structure that s mineral and then polymer and it makes it very very tough .
it s twice as tough as our high tech ceramics .
but what s really interesting unlike our ceramics that are in kilns it happens in seawater . it happens near in and near the organism s body .
this is sandia national labs . a guy named jeff brinker has found a way to have a self assembling coding process .
imagine being able to make ceramics at room temperature by simply dipping something into a liquid lifting it out of the liquid and having evaporation force the molecules in the liquid together so that they jigsaw together in the same way as this crystallization works .
imagine making all of our hard materials that way .
imagine spraying the precursors to a pv cell to a solar cell onto a roof and having it self assemble into a layered structure that harvests light .
here s an interesting one for the it world bio silicon . this is a diatom which is made of silicates .
and so silicon which we make right now it s part of our carcinogenic problem in the manufacture of our chips 
this is a bio mineralization process that s now being mimicked .
this is at uc santa barbara . look at these diatoms .
this is from ernst haeckel s work .
imagine being able to and again it s a templated process and it solidifies out of a liquid process imagine being able to have that sort of structure coming out at room temperature .
imagine being able to make perfect lenses .
on the left this is a brittle star it s covered with lenses that the people at lucent technologies have found have no distortion whatsoever .
it s one of the most distortion free lenses we know of .
and there s many of them all over its entire body .
what s interesting again is that it self assembles .
a woman named joanna aizenberg at lucent is now learning to do this in a low temperature process to create these sort of lenses . she s also looking at fiber optics .
that s a sea sponge that has a fiber optic .
down at the very base of it there s fiber optics that work better than ours actually to move light 
but you can tie them in a knot they re incredibly flexible .
here s another big idea co as a feedstock .
a guy named geoff coates at cornell said to himself you know plants do not see co as the biggest poison of our time .
we see it that way . plants are busy making long chains of starches and glucose right out of co . he s found a way he s found a catalyst and he s found a way to take co and make it into polycarbonates . biodegradable plastics out of co how plant like .
solar transformations the most exciting one .
in our fuel cells we do it with platinum 
life does it with a very very common iron .
and a team has now just been able to mimic that hydrogen juggling hydrogenase .
that s very exciting for fuel cells to be able to do that without platinum .
power of shape here s a whale . we ve seen that the fins of this whale have tubercles on them . and those little bumps actually increase efficiency in for instance the edge of an airplane increase efficiency by about percent .
which is an amazing fossil fuel savings if we were to just put that on the edge of a wing .
color without pigments this peacock is creating color with shape .
light comes through it bounces back off the layers 
it s called thin film interference . imagine being able to self assemble products with the last few layers playing with light to create color .
imagine being able to create a shape on the outside of a surface so that it s self cleaning with just water . that s what a leaf does .
see that up close picture ?
that s a ball of water and those are dirt particles .
and that s an up close picture of a lotus leaf .
there s a company making a product called lotusan which mimics 
when the building facade paint dries it mimics the bumps in a self cleaning leaf and rainwater cleans the building .
water is going to be our big grand challenge quenching thirst .
here are two organisms that pull water .
the one on the left is the namibian beetle pulling water out of fog .
the one on the right is a pill bug pulls water out of air 
does not drink fresh water .
pulling water out of monterey fog and out of the sweaty air in atlanta before it gets into a building are key technologies .
separation technologies are going to be extremely important .
what if we were to say no more hard rock mining ?
what if we were to separate out metals from waste streams small amounts of metals in water ? that s what microbes do they chelate metals out of water .
there s a company here in san francisco called mr that is embedding mimics of the microbes molecules on filters to mine waste streams .
green chemistry is chemistry in water .
we do chemistry in organic solvents .
this is a picture of the spinnerets coming out of a spider and the silk being formed from a spider . isn t that beautiful ?
green chemistry is replacing our industrial chemistry with nature s recipe book .
it s not easy because life uses only a subset of the elements in the periodic table .
and we use all of them even the toxic ones .
to figure out the elegant recipes that would take the small subset of the periodic table and create miracle materials like that cell is the task of green chemistry .
timed degradation packaging that is good until you don t want it to be good anymore and dissolves on cue .
that s a mussel you can find in the waters out here 
and the threads holding it to a rock are timed at exactly two years they begin to dissolve .
healing this is a good one .
that little guy over there is a tardigrade .
there is a problem with vaccines around the world not getting to patients . and the reason is that the refrigeration somehow gets broken 
what s called the cold chain gets broken .
meaning that vaccines no longer need to be refrigerated .
they can be put in a glove compartment ok .
learning from organisms . this is a session about water learning about organisms that can do without water in order to create a vaccine that lasts and lasts and lasts without refrigeration .
i m not going to get to .
when they re involved in foreplay they re thinking about something very very important and that s having their genetic material remain generations from now .
and that means finding a way to do what they do without destroying the place that ll take care of their offspring .
that s the biggest design challenge .
luckily there are millions and millions of geniuses willing to gift us with their best ideas .
good luck having a conversation with them .
thank you .
chris anderson talk about foreplay i we need to get to but really quickly .
janine benyus oh really ?
ca yeah . just like you know like the second version of and . because we just your slides are so gorgeous and the ideas are so big i can t stand to let you go down without seeing and .
jb ok put this ok i ll just hold this thing . ok great .
ok so that s the healing one .
sensing and responding feedback is a huge thing .
this is a locust . there can be million of them in a square kilometer and yet they don t collide with one another .
and yet we have . million car collisions a year .
right . there s a person at newcastle who has figured out that it s a very large neuron .
and she s actually figuring out how to make a collision avoidance circuitry based on this very large neuron in the locust .
this is a huge and important one number . and that s the growing fertility .
that means you know net fertility farming .
we should be growing fertility . and oh yes we get food too .
because we have to grow the capacity of this planet to create more and more opportunities for life .
and really that s what other organisms do as well .
in ensemble that s what whole ecosystems do they create more and more opportunities for life .
our farming has done the opposite .
so farming based on how a prairie builds soil ranching based on how a native ungulate herd actually increases the health of the range 
even wastewater treatment based on how a marsh not only cleans the water but creates incredibly sparkling productivity .
this is the simple design brief . i mean it looks simple because the system over . billion years has worked this out .
that is those organisms that have not been able to figure out how to enhance or sweeten their places are not around to tell us about it .
that s the twelfth one .
life and this is the secret trick this is the magic trick life creates conditions conducive to life .
it builds soil it cleans air it cleans water it mixes the cocktail of gases that you and i need to live .
and it does that in the middle of having great foreplay and meeting their needs . so it s not mutually exclusive .
we have to find a way to meet our needs while making of this place an eden .
ca janine thank you so much .
i don t know about you but i haven t quite figured out exactly what technology means in my life .
i ve spent the past year thinking about what it really should be about .
should i be pro technology ? should i embrace it full arms ?
should i be wary ? like you i m very tempted by the latest thing .
and i ve since then tried to keep technology at arm s length in many ways so it doesn t master my life .
at the same time i run a website on cool tools where i issue a daily obsession of the latest things in technology .
so i m still perplexed about what the true meaning of technology is as it relates to humanity as it relates to nature as it relates to the spiritual .
and i m not even sure we know what technology is .
and one definition of technology is that which is first recorded .
this is the first example of the modern use of technology that i can find .
it was the suggested syllabus for dealing with the applied arts and science at cambridge university in .
before that obviously technology didn t exist . but obviously it did .
i like one of the definitions that alan kay has for technology .
he says technology is anything that was invented after you were born .
so it sums up a lot of what we re talking about .
danny hillis actually has an update on that he says technology is anything that doesn t quite work yet .
which also i think gets into a little bit of our current idea .
but i was interested in another definition of technology .
something again that went back to something more fundamental .
something that was deeper . and as i struggled to understand that i came up with a way of framing the question that seemed to work for me in my investigations .
and i m this morning going to talk about this for the first time .
so this is a very rough attempt to think out loud .
the question that i came up with was this question what does technology want ? and by that i don t mean does it want chocolate or vanilla ? by what it wants i mean what are its inherent trends and biases ?
what are its tendencies over time ? one way to think about this is thinking about biological organisms which we ve heard a lot about .
and the trick that richard dawkins does which is to say to look at them as simply as genes as vehicles for genes .
so he s saying what do genes want ? the selfish gene .
and i m applying a similar trick to say what if we looked at the universe in our culture through the eyes of technology ? what does technology want ?
obviously this in an incomplete question 
just as looking at an organism as only a gene is an incomplete way of looking at it .
but it s still very very productive . so i m attempting to say if we take technology s view of the world what does it want ?
and i think once we ask that question we have to go back actually to life . because obviously if we keep extending the origins of technology far back i think we come back to life at some point .
so that s where i want to begin my little exploration is in life .
and like you heard from the previous speakers we don t really know what life there is on earth right now .
we have really no idea .
craig venter s tremendous and brilliant attempt to dna sequence things in the ocean is great .
brian farrell s work is all part of this agenda to try and actually discover all the species on earth .
we would begin to see some incredible species .
this is not on another planet . these are things that are hidden away on our planet .
this is an ant that stores its colleagues honey in its abdomen .
each one of these organisms that we ve described that you ve seen from jamie and others these magnificent things what they re doing each one of them is they re hacking the rules of life .
i can t think of a single general principle of biology that does not have an exception somewhere by some organism .
every single thing that we can think of and if you heard olivia s talk about the sexual habits you ll realize that there isn t anything we can say that s true for all life 
because every single one of them is hacking something about it .
this is a solar powered sea slug . it s a nudibranch that has incorporated chloroplast inside it to drive its energy .
this is another version of that . this is a sea dragon and the one on the bottom the blue one is a juvenile that has not yet swallowed the acid has not yet taken in the brown green algae pond scum into its body to give it energy .
those are the general approaches to life . that s one way to look at life on earth today .
but a more interesting way the current way to take the long view is to look at it in an evolutionary perspective .
and here we have a view of evolution where rather than having evolution go over the linear time we have it coming out from the center .
so in the center is the most primitive and this is a genealogical chart of all life on earth . this is all the same six kingdoms .
you see representative species and you can see where we are .
but what i like about this is it shows that every living organism on earth today is equally evolved .
those fungi and bacteria are as highly evolved as humans .
they ve been around just as long and gone through just the same kind of trial and error to get here .
but we see that each one of these is actually hacking and has a different way of finding out how to do life .
and if we take the long term trends of life if we begin to say what does evolution want ? there s several things that we see .
one of the things about evolution is that nowhere on earth have we ever been where we don t find life .
we find life at the bottom of every long term long distance drilling core into the center of rock that we bring up and there s bacteria in the pores of that rock .
and wherever life is it never retreats . it s ubiquitous and it wants to be more .
more and more of the inert matter of the globe is being touched and animated by life .
the second thing is is we see diversity . we also see specialization .
we see the movement from a general purpose cell to the more specific and specialized .
and we see a drift towards complexity that s very intuitive .
and actually we have current data that does show that there is an actual drift towards complexity over time .
and the last thing i bring back this nudibranch .
one of the things we see about life is that it moves from the inner to increasing sociability . and by that it means that there is more and more of life whose entire environment is other life .
like those chloroplast cells they re completely surrounded by other life .
they never touch the inner matter . there is more and more co evolution .
and so the general long term trends of evolution are roughly these five ubiquity diversity specialization complexity and socialization . now i took that and said ok what are the long term trends in technology ?
and again my question is what does technology want ?
and so remarkably i discovered that there s also a drift toward specialization .
that we see there s a general hammer 
and hammers become more and more specific over time .
there s obviously diversity . huge numbers of things .
this is all the contents of a japanese home .
i actually had my daughter gave her a tally counter 
and i gave her an assignment last summer to go around and count the number of species of technology in our household .
and it came up with different species of products .
i did some research and found out that the king of england henry viii had only about items in his household .
and he was the king of england 
and that was the entire wealth of england at the time .
so we re seeing huge numbers of diversity in the kinds of things .
this is a scene from star wars where the po comes out and he sees machines making machines . how depraved !
well this is actually what we re headed towards world machines .
and the technology is only being thrown out by other technologies .
most machines will only ever be in contact with other technology and not non technology or even life .
and thirdly the idea that machines are becoming biological and complex is at this point a cliche . and i m happy to say i was partly responsible for that cliche
that machines are becoming biological but that s pretty evident .
i suggest that in fact technology is the seventh kingdom of life .
that its operations and how it works is so similar that we can think of it as the seventh kingdom .
and so it would be sort of approximately up there coming out of the animal kingdom . and if we were to do that we would find out we could actually approach technology in this way .
this is niles eldredge . he was the co developer with stephen jay gould of the theory of punctuated equilibrium .
but as a sideline he happens to collect cornets .
he has one of the world s largest collections about of them .
and he has decided to treat them as if they were trilobites or snails and to do a morphological analysis and try to derive their genealogical history over time .
this is his chart which is not quite published yet .
but the most interesting aspect about this is that if you look at those red lines at the bottom those indicate basically a parentage of a type of cornet that was no longer made . that does not happen in biology .
when something is extinct you can t have it as your parent .
but that does happen in technology . and it turns out that that s so distinctive that you can actually look at this tree and you can actually use it to determine that this is a technological system versus a biological system .
in fact this idea of resurrecting the whole idea is so important that i began to think about what happens with old technology .
and it turns out that in fact technologies don t die .
so i suggested this to an historian of science and he said well what about you know come on what about steam cars ?
they re not around anymore . well actually they are .
in fact they re so around that you can buy new parts for a stanley steam automobile .
and this is a website of a guy who s selling brand new parts for the stanley automobile . and the thing that i liked is sort of this one click add to your cart button for buying steam valves . i mean it was just it was really there .
and so i began to think about well maybe that s just a random sample .
maybe i should do this sort of in a more conservative way .
and not antiques . i want to know how many of these things are still in production .
and the answer is all of them .
all of them are still being produced . so you ve got corn shellers .
i don t know who needs a corn sheller .
be it corn shellers you ve got ploughs you ve got fan mills all these things and these are not again antiques . these are you can order these . you can go to the web and you can buy them now 
brand new made . so in a certain sense technologies don t die .
in fact you can buy for bucks a stone age knife made exactly the same way that they were made years ago .
it s short bone handle bucks . and in fact 
what s important is that this information actually never died out .
it s not just that it was resurrected . it s continued all along .
and in papua new guinea they were making stone axes until two decades ago just as a course of practical matters .
even when we try to get rid of a technology it s actually very hard .
so we ve all heard about the amish giving up cars .
we ve heard about the japanese giving up guns .
we ve heard about this and that . but i actually went back and took what i could find the examples in history where there have been prohibitions against technology and then i tried to find out when they came back in 
that s what it s for . it s so that ideas don t die out .
they re actually changing the way in which ideas are generated .
so all these steps in evolution are increasing basically the evolution of evolvability .
so what s happening over time in life is that the ways in which you generate these new ideas these new hacks are increasing . and the real tricks are ways in which you kind of explore the way of exploring .
and then what we see in the singularity that prophesized by kurzweil and others his idea that technology is accelerating evolution .
it s accelerating the way in which we search for ideas .
so if you have life hacking life means hacking the game of survival then evolution is a way to extend the game by changing the rules of the game .
and what technology is really about is better ways to evolve .
that is what we call an infinite game . 
that s the definition of infinite game . a finite game is play to win and an infinite game is played to keep playing .
and i believe that technology is actually a cosmic force .
that s the definition . there was no temperature .
there was no difference whatsoever . and at the big bang what it expanded was the potential for difference .
so as it expands and as things expand what we have is the potential for differences diversity options choices opportunities possibilities and freedoms .
those are all basically the same thing .
and those are the things that technology brings us .
that s what technology is bringing us choices possibilities freedoms .
that s what it s about . it s this expansion of room to make differences .
and so a hammer when we grab a hammer that s what we re grabbing .
and that s why we continue to grab technology because we want those things . those things are good .
differences freedom choices possibilities .
and each time we make a new opportunity place we re allowing a platform to make new ones .
and i think it s really important . because if you can imagine mozart before the technology of the piano was invented what a loss to society there would be .
imagine van gogh being born before the technologies of cheap oil paints .
imagine hitchcock before the technologies of film .
somewhere today there are millions of young children being born whose technology of self expression has not yet been invented .
we have a moral obligation to invent technology so that every person on the globe has the potential to realize their true difference .
we want a trillion zillion species of one individuals .
that s what technology really wants .
i m going to skip through some of the objections
because i don t have answers to why there s deforestation .
maybe in some ways the fact that what we re trying to do with technology is find a good home for it .
it s a terrible thing to spray ddt on cotton fields but it s a really good thing to use to eliminate millions of cases of death due to malaria in a small village .
our humanity is actually defined by technology .
all the things that we think that we really like about humanity is being driven by technology . this is the infinite game .
that s what we re talking about .
you see technology is a way to evolve the evolution .
it s a way to explore possibilities and opportunities and create more .
and it s actually a way of playing the game of playing all the games .
that s what technology wants .
that recursive nature is the infinite game .
and if you play that well you ll have other people involved so even that game extends and continues even when you re gone .
that is the infinite game . and what technology is is the medium in which we play that infinite game .
and so i think that we should embrace technology because it is an essential part of our journey in finding out who we are .
thank you .
i think i was supposed to talk about my new book which is called blink and it s about snap judgments and first impressions .
and it comes out in january and i hope you all buy it in triplicate .
but i was thinking about this and i realized that although my new book makes me happy and i think would make my mother happy it s not really about happiness .
so i decided instead i would talk about someone who i think has done as much to make americans happy as perhaps anyone over the last years 
a man who is a great personal hero of mine 
someone by the name of howard moskowitz who is most famous for reinventing spaghetti sauce .
howard s about this high and he s round and he s in his s and he has big huge glasses and thinning gray hair and he has a kind of wonderful exuberance and vitality and he has a parrot and he loves the opera and he s a great aficionado of medieval history .
and by profession he s a psychophysicist .
now i should tell you that i have no idea what psychophysics is although at some point in my life i dated a girl for two years who was getting her doctorate in psychophysics .
which should tell you something about that relationship . as far as i know psychophysics is about measuring things .
and howard is very interested in measuring things .
and he graduated with his doctorate from harvard and he set up a little consulting shop in white plains new york .
and one of his first clients was pepsi . this is many years ago back in the early s .
and pepsi came to howard and they said you know there s this new thing called aspartame and we would like to make diet pepsi .
we d like you to figure out how much aspartame we should put in each can of diet pepsi in order to have the perfect drink . 
now that sounds like an incredibly straightforward question to answer and that s what howard thought . because pepsi told him we re working with a band between eight and percent .
anything below eight percent sweetness is not sweet enough anything above percent sweetness is too sweet .
we want to know what s the sweet spot between and ? 
now if i gave you this problem to do you would all say it s very simple .
what we do is you make up a big experimental batch of pepsi at every degree of sweetness eight percent . . . 
all the way up to and we try this out with thousands of people and we plot the results on a curve and we take the most popular concentration right ? really simple .
howard does the experiment and he gets the data back and he plots it on a curve 
and all of a sudden he realizes it s not a nice bell curve .
in fact the data doesn t make any sense .
it s a mess . it s all over the place .
now most people in that business in the world of testing food and such are not dismayed when the data comes back a mess .
they think well you know figuring out what people think about cola s not that easy . 
 you know maybe we made an error somewhere along the way . 
 you know let s just make an educated guess and they simply point and they go for percent right in the middle .
howard is not so easily placated .
howard is a man of a certain degree of intellectual standards .
and this was not good enough for him and this question bedeviled him for years .
and he would think it through and say what was wrong ?
why could we not make sense of this experiment with diet pepsi ? 
and one day he was sitting in a diner in white plains about to go trying to dream up some work for nescafe .
and suddenly like a bolt of lightning the answer came to him .
and that is that when they analyzed the diet pepsi data they were asking the wrong question .
they were looking for the perfect pepsi and they should have been looking for the perfect pepsis . trust me .
this was an enormous revelation .
this was one of the most brilliant breakthroughs in all of food science .
howard immediately went on the road and he would go to conferences around the country and he would stand up and say you had been looking for the perfect pepsi . you re wrong .
you should be looking for the perfect pepsis . 
and people would look at him blankly and say what are you talking about ? craziness . 
and they would say move ! next ! 
tried to get business nobody would hire him he was obsessed though and he talked about it and talked about it .
howard loves the yiddish expression to a worm in horseradish the world is horseradish . 
this was his horseradish . he was obsessed with it !
and finally he had a breakthrough . vlasic pickles came to him and they said doctor moskowitz we want to make the perfect pickle . and he said there is no perfect pickle there are only perfect pickles . 
and he came back to them and he said you don t just need to improve your regular you need to create zesty . 
and that s where we got zesty pickles .
then the next person came to him campbell s soup .
and this was even more important . in fact campbell s soup is where howard made his reputation .
campbell s made prego and prego in the early s was struggling next to ragu which was the dominant spaghetti sauce of the s and s .
in the industry i don t know whether you care about this or how much time i have to go into this .
but it was technically speaking this is an aside prego is a better tomato sauce than ragu .
the quality of the tomato paste is much better the spice mix is far superior it adheres to the pasta in a much more pleasing way . in fact they would do the famous bowl test back in the s with ragu and prego .
you d have a plate of spaghetti and you would pour it on right ?
and the ragu would all go to the bottom and the prego would sit on top .
that s called adherence . 
and anyway despite the fact that they were far superior in adherence and the quality of their tomato paste prego was struggling .
so they came to howard and they said fix us .
and howard looked at their product line and he said what you have is a dead tomato society .
so he said this is what i want to do .
and he got together with the campbell s soup kitchen and he made varieties of spaghetti sauce . and he varied them according to every conceivable way that you can vary tomato sauce 
by sweetness by level of garlic by tomatoey ness by tartness by sourness by visible solids my favorite term in the spaghetti sauce business . every conceivable way you can vary spaghetti sauce he varied spaghetti sauce .
and then he took this whole raft of spaghetti sauces and he went on the road .
he went to new york to chicago he went to jacksonville to los angeles . and he brought in people by the truckload into big halls .
and he sat them down for two hours and over the course of that two hours he gave them ten bowls .
ten small bowls of pasta with a different spaghetti sauce on each one .
and after they ate each bowl they had to rate from to how good they thought the spaghetti sauce was .
at the end of that process after doing it for months and months he had a mountain of data about how the american people feel about spaghetti sauce .
and then he analyzed the data .
did he look for the most popular variety of spaghetti sauce ?
no ! howard doesn t believe that there is such a thing .
instead he looked at the data and he said let s see if we can group all these different data points into clusters .
let s see if they congregate around certain ideas .
and sure enough if you sit down and you analyze all this data on spaghetti sauce you realize that all americans fall into one of three groups .
there are people who like their spaghetti sauce plain there are people who like their spaghetti sauce spicy and there are people who like it extra chunky .
and of those three facts the third one was the most significant 
because at the time in the early s if you went to a supermarket you would not find extra chunky spaghetti sauce .
and prego turned to howard and they said you re telling me that one third of americans crave extra chunky spaghetti sauce and yet no one is servicing their needs ? and he said yes ! 
and prego then went back and completely reformulated their spaghetti sauce and came out with a line of extra chunky that immediately and completely took over the spaghetti sauce business in this country .
and over the next years they made million dollars off their line of extra chunky sauces .
everyone else in the industry looked at what howard had done and they said oh my god ! we ve been thinking all wrong ! 
and that s when you started to get seven different kinds of vinegar and different kinds of mustard and different kinds of olive oil . and then eventually even ragu hired howard and howard did the exact same thing for ragu that he did for prego .
and today if you go to a really good supermarket do you know how many ragus there are ? !
in six varieties cheese light robusto rich amp hearty old world traditional extra chunky garden . that s howard s doing . that is howard s gift to the american people .
now why is that important ?
it is in fact enormously important . i ll explain to you why .
what howard did is he fundamentally changed the way the food industry thinks about making you happy .
assumption number one in the food industry used to be that the way to find out what people want to eat what will make people happy is to ask them .
and for years and years and years ragu and prego would have focus groups and they would sit you down and they would say what do you want in a spaghetti sauce ? tell us what you want in a spaghetti sauce . 
and for all those years years through all those focus group sessions no one ever said they wanted extra chunky .
even though at least a third of them deep in their hearts actually did .
people don t know what they want !
as howard loves to say the mind knows not what the tongue wants . 
it s a mystery !
and a critically important step in understanding our own desires and tastes is to realize that we cannot always explain what we want deep down .
if i asked all of you for example in this room what you want in a coffee you know what you d say ? every one of you would say i want a dark rich hearty roast . 
it s what people always say when you ask them .
 what do you like ? dark rich hearty roast ! 
what percentage of you actually like a dark rich hearty roast ?
according to howard somewhere between and percent of you .
most of you like milky weak coffee .
but you will never ever say to someone who asks you what you want that i want a milky weak coffee . so that s number one thing that howard did .
number two thing that howard did is he made us realize it s another very critical point he made us realize the importance of what he likes to call horizontal segmentation . 
why is this critical ? because this is the way the food industry thought before howard .
what were they obsessed with in the early s ? they were obsessed with mustard .
in particular they were obsessed with the story of grey poupon .
used to be there were two mustards french s and gulden s .
what were they ? yellow mustard . what s in it ?
yellow mustard seeds turmeric and paprika . that was mustard .
grey poupon came along with a dijon . right ?
much more volatile brown mustard seed some white wine a nose hit much more delicate aromatics . and what do they do ?
they put it in a little tiny glass jar with a wonderful enameled label on it made it look french even though it s made in oxnard california .
and instead of charging a dollar fifty for the eight ounce bottle the way that french s and gulden s did they decided to charge four dollars .
and they had those ads . with the guy in the rolls royce eating the grey poupon . another pulls up and says do you have any grey poupon ? 
and the whole thing after they did that grey poupon takes off !
takes over the mustard business !
and everyone s take home lesson from that was that the way to make people happy is to give them something that is more expensive something to aspire to .
it s to make them turn their back on what they think they like now and reach out for something higher up the mustard hierarchy .
a better mustard ! a more expensive mustard !
a mustard of more sophistication and culture and meaning .
and howard looked to that and said that s wrong ! 
mustard does not exist on a hierarchy .
mustard exists just like tomato sauce on a horizontal plane .
there is no good mustard or bad mustard .
there is no perfect mustard or imperfect mustard .
there are only different kinds of mustards that suit different kinds of people .
he fundamentally democratized the way we think about taste .
and for that as well we owe howard moskowitz a huge vote of thanks .
third thing that howard did and perhaps the most important is howard confronted the notion of the platonic dish . what do i mean by that ?
for the longest time in the food industry there was a sense that there was one way a perfect way to make a dish .
you go to chez panisse they give you the red tail sashimi with roasted pumpkin seeds in a something something reduction .
they don t give you five options on the reduction .
they don t say do you want the extra chunky reduction or . . . ? no !
you just get the reduction . why ? because the chef at chez panisse has a platonic notion about red tail sashimi .
 this is the way it ought to be . 
and she serves it that way time and time again and if you quarrel with her she will say you know what ? you re wrong ! this is the best way it ought to be in this restaurant . 
now that same idea fueled the commercial food industry as well .
they had a platonic notion of what tomato sauce was .
and where did that come from ? it came from italy .
italian tomato sauce is what ? it s blended it s thin .
the culture of tomato sauce was thin .
when we talked about authentic tomato sauce in the s we talked about italian tomato sauce we talked about the earliest ragus 
which had no visible solids right ?
which were thin you just put a little bit and it sunk down to the bottom of the pasta .
that s what it was . and why were we attached to that ?
because we thought that what it took to make people happy was to provide them with the most culturally authentic tomato sauce a . and b we thought that if we gave them the culturally authentic tomato sauce then they would embrace it .
and that s what would please the maximum number of people .
in other words people in the cooking world were looking for cooking universals .
they were looking for one way to treat all of us .
and it s good reason for them to be obsessed with the idea of universals because all of science through the th century and much of the th was obsessed with universals . psychologists medical scientists economists
were all interested in finding out the rules that govern the way all of us behave .
but that changed right ?
what is the great revolution in science of the last years ?
it is the movement from the search for universals to the understanding of variability .
now in medical science we don t want to know necessarily just how cancer works we want to know how your cancer is different from my cancer .
i guess my cancer different from your cancer .
genetics has opened the door to the study of human variability .
what howard moskowitz was doing was saying this same revolution needs to happen in the world of tomato sauce . 
and for that we owe him a great vote of thanks .
i ll give you one last illustration of variability and that is oh i m sorry .
howard not only believed that but he took it a second step which was to say that when we pursue universal principles in food we aren t just making an error we are actually doing ourselves a massive disservice .
and the example he used was coffee .
and coffee is something he did a lot of work with with nescafe .
if however you allowed me to break you into coffee clusters maybe three or four coffee clusters and i could make coffee just for each of those individual clusters your scores would go from to or .
the difference between coffee at and coffee at is a difference between coffee that makes you wince and coffee that makes you deliriously happy .
that is the final and i think most beautiful lesson of howard moskowitz 
that in embracing the diversity of human beings we will find a surer way to true happiness .
thank you .
over the past couple of days as i ve been preparing for my speech i ve become more and more nervous about what i m going to say and about being on the same stage as all these fascinating people .
being on the same stage as al gore who was the first person i ever voted for .
and 
so i was getting pretty nervous
and you know i didn t know that chris sits on the stage and that s more nerve racking .
but then i started thinking about my family . i started thinking about my father and my grandfather and my great grandfather 
and i realized that i had all of these teds going through my bloodstream that i had to consider this my element . 
so who am i ?
chris kind of mentioned i started a company with my husband .
we have about people internationally .
if you looked in the book you saw this . . . which i really was appalled by .
and because i wanted to impress you all with slides since i saw the great presentations yesterday with graphs 
i made a graph that moves and i talk about the makeup of me .
so besides this freakish thing this is my science slide . this is math and this is science this is genetics .
this is my grandmother and this is where i get this mouth .
so i m a blogger which probably to a lot of you means different things .
you may have heard about the kryptonite lock brouhaha 
where a blogger talked about how you hack or break into a kryptonite lock using a ballpoint pen 
and it spread all over . kryptonite had to adjust the lock 
and they had to address it to avoid too many customer concerns .
you may have heard about rathergate which was basically the result of bloggers realizing that the th in is not typeset on an old typewriter it s on word .
bloggers exposed this or they worked hard to expose this .
you know blogs are scary . this is what you see .
i see this and i m sure scared i swear on stage shitless about blogs because this is not something that s friendly .
but there are blogs that are changing the way we read news and consume media and these are great examples .
these people are reaching thousands if not millions of readers and that s incredibly important .
during the hurricane you had msnbc posting about the hurricane on their blog updating it frequently . this was possible because of the easy nature of blogging tools .
you have my friend who has a blog on pvrs personal recorders .
he makes enough money just by running ads to support his family up in oregon .
that s all he does now 
and this is something that blogs have made possible .
and then you have something like this which is interplast .
it s a wonderful organization of people and doctors who go to developing nations to offer plastic surgery to those who need it .
children with cleft palates get it and they document their story . this is wonderful .
i am not that caring .
i talk about myself . that s what i am . i m a blogger .
i have always decided that i was going to be an expert on one thing 
and i am an expert on this person and so i write about it .
so the short story about my blog it started in i was .
i wasn t happy with my job because i was a designer but i wasn t being really stimulated .
i was an english major in college . i didn t have any use for it but i missed writing . so i started to write a blog
and i started to create things like these little stories . this was an illustration about my camp experience when i was years old 
you can laugh this is ok .
this is me .
this is what happened to me .
and when i started my blog it was really this one goal 
i said i am not going to be famous to the world but i could be famous to people on the internet . and i set a goal . i said i m going to win an award because i had never won an award in my entire life .
and i said i m going to win the south by southwest weblog award . 
and i won it i reached all of these people and i had tens of thousands of people reading about my life every day .
and then i wrote a post about a banjo .
i wrote a post about wanting to buy a banjo a banjo which is a lot of money .
and i don t play instruments i don t know anything about music .
i like music and i like banjos and i think i probably heard steve martin playing and i said i could do that . 
and i said to my husband ben can i buy a banjo ? and he s like no . 
and my husband this is my husband who is very hot 
he won an award for being hot . he told me you cannot buy a banjo .
you re just like your dad who collects instruments . and i wrote a post about how i was so mad at him 
he was such a tyrant he would not let me buy this banjo .
and those people who know me understood my joke 
this is mena this is how i make a joke at people .
because the joke in this is that this person is not a tyrant this person is so loving and so sweet that he lets me dress him up and post pictures of him to my blog .
and if he knew i was showing this right now i put this in today he would kill me .
but the thing was my friends read it and they re like oh that mena she wrote a post about wanting a stupid thing and being stupid . 
but i got emails from people that said oh my god your husband is such an asshole .
how much money does he spend on beer in a year ?
you could take that money and buy your banjo .
why don t you open a separate account ? 
i ve been with him since i was we ve never had a separate bank account .
they said separate your bank account . spend your money spend his money that s it . 
and then i got people saying leave him . 
i was like ok what ? who are these people ?
and why are they reading this ? 
and i realized i don t want to reach these people .
i don t want to write for this public audience .
and i started to kill my blog slowly .
i m like i don t want to write this anymore . slowly and slowly and i did tell personal stories from time to time .
i wrote this one and i put this up because of einstein today .
i m going to get choked up because this is my first pet and she passed away two years ago .
and i decided to break from i don t really write about my public life because i wanted to give her a little memorial .
but anyways it s these sorts of personal stories you know you read the blogs about politics or about media and gossip and all these things . these are out there 
but it s more of the personal that interests me 
and this is who i am .
you see norman rockwell and you have art critics say norman rockwell is not art .
norman rockwell hangs in living rooms and bathrooms and this is not something to be considered high art . 
and i think this is one of the most important things to us as humans .
these things resonate with us and if you think about blogs you think of high art blogs the history paintings about you know all the biblical stories and then you have this .
these are the blogs that interest me the people that just tell stories .
one story is about this baby and his name is odin .
his father was a blogger .
and he was writing his blog one day and his wife gave birth to her baby at weeks .
and he never expected this .
one day it was normal the next day it was hell .
and this is a one pound baby .
so odin was documented every single day .
pictures were taken every day day one day two . . .
you have day nine they re talking about his apnea 
day he gets pneumonia .
his baby is so small and i ve never encountered such a just a disturbing image but just so heartfelt .
and you re reading this as it happens so on day everybody reads that he s having failures breathing failures and heart failures and it s slowing down and you don t know what to expect .
but then it gets better . day he goes home .
and you see this post .
that s not something you re going to see in a paper or magazine
but this is something this person feels and people are excited about it comments .
that s not a huge amount of people reading but people matter .
so blogs .
so what ? you ve probably heard these things before .
we talked about the well and about all these sorts of things throughout our online history . but i think blogs are basically just an evolution and that s where we are today .
it s this record of who you are your persona .
you have your google search where you say what is mena trott ? 
and then you find these things and you re happy or unhappy .
but then you also find people s blogs and those are the records of people that are writing daily not necessarily about the same topic but things that interest them .
and we talk about the world flattens being in this panel and i am very optimistic whenever i think about blogs 
i m like we ve got to reach all these people . 
hundreds of millions and billions of people .
we re getting into china we want to be there but there are so many people that won t have the access to write a blog .
but to see something like the computer is amazing because blogging software is simple .
we have a successful company because of timing and because of perseverance but it s simple stuff it s not rocket science .
and so that s an amazing thing to consider .
so the life record of a blog is something that i find incredibly important .
and we started with a slide of my teds and i had to add this slide because i knew the minute i showed this my mom 
my mom will see this because she does read my blog and she ll say why wasn t there a picture of me ? 
this is my mom . so i have all the people that i know of .
but this is basically the extent of the family that i know in terms of my direct line .
i showed a norman rockwell painting before and this one i grew up with looking at constantly .
i would spend hours looking at the connections saying oh the little kid up at the top has red hair so does that first generation up there . 
and it s just these little things .
this is not science but this was enough for me to be really interested in how we have evolved and how we can trace our line .
so that has always influenced me .
i have this record this census of another grabowski that s my maiden name and there s a theodore because there s always a theodore .
this is all i have a couple of facts about somebody .
i have their date of birth their age what they did in their household if they spoke english and that s it that s all i know of these people .
and it s pretty sad because i only go back five generations and that s it .
i don t even know what happens on my mom s side because she s from cuba and i don t have that many things .
just doing this i spent time in the archives that s why my husband s a saint i spent time in the washington archives just sitting there looking for these things . now it s online but he sat through that .
and so you have this record and this is my great great grandmother .
this is the only picture i have . and to think of what we have the ability to do with our blogs to think about the people that are on those computers talking about who they are sharing these personal stories this is an amazing thing .
another photo that has greatly influenced me or a series of photos is this project that s done by an argentinean man and his wife .
and he s basically taking a picture of his family every day for the past what is ? . . . oh my god i m years ? twenty nine years .
there was a joke originally about my graph that i left out which is you see all this math ? i m just happy i was able to add it up to because that s my skill set .
so you have these people aging and now this is them today or last year . and that s a powerful thing to have to be able to track this .
i wish that i would have this of my family .
i take a picture of myself i ve been doing this since last year every single day .
and you know it s the same picture it s basically the same person .
only a couple of people read it .
i don t write this for this audience i m showing it now but i would go insane if this was really public .
about four people probably read it and they tell me you haven t updated . 
i m probably going to get people telling me i haven t updated . but this is amazing because i can go back to a day to april and say what was i doing this day ? i look at it i know exactly .
it s this visual cue that is so important to what we do .
i put the bad pictures up too because there are bad pictures .
and i remember instantly i am in germany in this 
i had to go for a one day trip .
i was sick and i was in a hotel room and i wanted not to be there . and so you see these things it s not just always smiling .
now i ve kind of evolved it so i have this look .
if you look at my driver s license i have the same look and it s a pretty disturbing thing but it s something that is really important .
and the last story i really want to tell is this story 
because this is probably the one that means the most to me in all of what i m doing .
i ll probably get choked up because i tend to when i talk about this .
so this woman her name was emma and she was a blogger on our service typepad . and she was a beta tester so she was there right when we opened you know there was people . and she wrote about her life dealing with cancer .
she was writing and writing and we all started reading it because we had so few blogs on the service we could keep track of everyone .
and she was writing one day and then she disappeared for a little bit .
and her sister came on and she said that emma had passed away . and all of our support staff who had talked to her were really emotional 
and it was a very hard day at the company . and this was one of those instances where i realized how much blogging affects our relationship and flattening this sort of world .
that this woman is in england and she lives she lived a life where she was talking about what she was doing .
that was an amazing thing .
and so i printed out and sent a pdf of her blog to her family and they passed it out at her memorial service and even in her obituary they mentioned her blog because it was such a big part of her life .
and that s a huge thing .
so this is her legacy and i think that my call to action to all of you is think about blogs think about what they are think about what you ve thought of them 
and then actually do it because it s something that s really going to change our lives .
so thank you .
i m michael shermer director of the skeptics society publisher of skeptic magazine .
we investigate claims of the paranormal pseudo science fringe groups and cults and claims of all kinds between science and pseudo science and non science and junk science voodoo science pathological science bad science non science and plain old non sense .
and unless you ve been on mars recently you know there s a lot of that out there .
some people call us debunkers which is kind of a negative term .
but let s face it there s a lot of bunk .
we are like the bunko squads of the police departments out there 
well we re sort of like the ralph naders of bad ideas trying to replace bad ideas with good ideas .
i ll show you an example of a bad idea .
i brought this with me 
this was given to us by nbc dateline to test .
it s produced by the quadro corporation of west virginia .
it s called the quadro dowser rod .
this was being sold to high school administrators for apiece .
it s a piece of plastic with a radio shack antenna attached to it .
you could dowse for all sorts of things but this particular one was built to dowse for marijuana in students lockers .
so the way it works is you go down the hallway and you see if it tilts toward a particular locker and then you open the locker .
so it looks something like this .
i ll show you .
well it has kind of a right leaning bias .
well this is science so we ll do a controlled experiment .
it ll go this way for sure .
sir do you want to empty your pockets please sir ?
so the question was can it actually find marijuana in students lockers ?
and the answer is if you open enough of them yes .
but in science we have to keep track of the misses not just the hits . and that s probably the key lesson to my short talk here 
this is how psychics work astrologers tarot card readers and so on .
people remember the hits and forget the misses .
in science we keep the whole database and look to see if the number of hits somehow stands out from the total number you d expect by chance .
in this case we tested it .
we had two opaque boxes one with government approved thc marijuana and one with nothing .
and it got it percent of the time 
which is exactly what you d expect with a coin flip model .
so that s just a fun little example here of the sorts of things we do .
this one is on the future of intelligence .
are people getting smarter or dumber ?
i have an opinion of this myself because of the business i m in 
but in fact people it turns out are getting smarter .
three iq points per years going up .
sort of an interesting thing .
with science don t think of skepticism as a thing or science as a thing .
are science and religion compatible ?
it s like are science and plumbing compatible ?
they re just two different things .
science is not a thing . it s a verb .
it s a way of thinking about things .
it s a way of looking for natural explanations for all phenomena .
i mean what s more likely that extraterrestrial intelligences or multi dimensional beings travel across vast distances of interstellar space to leave a crop circle in farmer bob s field in puckerbrush kansas to promote skeptic .com our web page ?
or is it more likely that a reader of skeptic did this with photoshop ?
and in all cases we have to ask what s the more likely explanation ?
before we say something is out of this world we should first make sure that it s not in this world .
what s more likely that arnold had extraterrestrial help in his run for the governorship 
or that the world weekly news makes stuff up ?
the same theme is expressed nicely here in this sidney harris cartoon . for those of you in the back it says here then a miracle occurs . i think you need to be more explicit here in step two . 
this single slide completely dismantles the intelligent design arguments .
there s nothing more to it than that .
you can say a miracle occurs 
it s just that it doesn t explain anything or offer anything .
there s nothing to test .
it s the end of the conversation for intelligent design creationists .
and it s true scientists sometimes throw terms out as linguistic place fillers dark energy or dark matter something like that 
until we figure out what it is we ll call it this .
it s the beginning of the causal chain for science .
for intelligent design creationists it s the end of the chain .
so again we can ask this what s more likely ?
are ufos alien spaceships or perceptual cognitive mistakes or even fakes ?
this is a ufo shot from my house in altadena california 
looking down over pasadena . and if it looks a lot like a buick hubcap it s because it is .
you don t even need photoshop or high tech equipment you don t need computers .
this was shot with a throwaway kodak instamatic camera .
you just have somebody off on the side with a hubcap ready to go . camera s ready that s it .
so although it s possible that most of these things are fake or illusions or so on and that some of them are real it s more likely that all of them are fake like the crop circles .
on a more serious note in all of science we re looking for a balance between data and theory .
in the case of galileo he had two problems when he turned his telescope to saturn .
first of all there was no theory of planetary rings .
second of all his data was grainy and fuzzy and he couldn t quite make out what he was looking at .
so he wrote that he had seen i have observed that the furthest planet has three bodies . 
and this is what he ended up concluding that he saw .
so without a theory of planetary rings and with only grainy data you can t have a good theory .
it wasn t solved until .
this is christiaan huygens s book that catalogs all the mistakes people made trying to figure out what was going on with saturn .
it wasn t till huygens had two things he had a good theory of planetary rings and how the solar system operated 
and he had better telescopic more fine grain data
in which he could figure out that as the earth is going around faster according to kepler s laws than saturn then we catch up with it .
and we see the angles of the rings at different angles there .
and that in fact turns out to be true .
the problem with having a theory is that it may be loaded with cognitive biases .
so one of the problems of explaining why people believe weird things is that we have things on a simple level 
and then i ll go to more serious ones .
like we have a tendency to see faces .
this is the face on mars . in where there was a whole movement to get nasa to photograph that area because people thought this was monumental architecture made by martians .
here s the close up of it from .
if you squint you can still see the face .
and when you re squinting you re turning that from fine grain to coarse grain 
so you re reducing the quality of your data . and if i didn t tell you what to look for you d still see the face because we re programmed by evolution to see faces .
faces are important for us socially .
and of course happy faces faces of all kinds are easy to see .
you see the happy face on mars there .
if astronomers were frogs perhaps they d see kermit the frog .
do you see him there ? little froggy legs .
or if geologists were elephants ?
religious iconography .
discovered by a tennessee baker in .
he charged five bucks a head to come see the nun bun till he got a cease and desist from mother teresa s lawyer .
here s our lady of guadalupe and our lady of watsonville just down the street or is it up the street from here ?
tree bark is particularly good because it s nice and grainy branchy 
black and white splotchy and you can get the pattern seeking humans are pattern seeking animals .
here s the virgin mary on the side of a glass window in sao paulo .
here s when the virgin mary made her appearance on a cheese sandwich which i got to actually hold in a las vegas casino 
of course this being america .
this casino paid on ebay for the cheese sandwich .
but who does it really look like ? the virgin mary ?
it has that sort of puckered lips s era look .
virgin mary in clearwater florida .
i actually went to see this one .
there was a lot of people there . the faithful come in their wheelchairs and crutches and so on .
we went down and investigated .
just to give you a size that s dawkins me and the amazing randi 
next to this two two and a half story sized image .
all these candles thousands of candles people had lit in tribute to this .
so we walked around the backside to see what was going on .
it turns out wherever there s a sprinkler head and a palm tree 
you get the effect . here s the virgin mary on the backside which they started to wipe off .
i guess you can only have one miracle per building .
so is it really a miracle of mary or is it a miracle of marge ?
and now i m going to finish up with another example of this 
with auditory illusions .
there s this film white noise with michael keaton about the dead talking back to us .
by the way the whole business of talking to the dead is not that big a deal .
anybody can do it turns out .
it s getting the dead to talk back that s the really hard part .
in this case supposedly these messages are hidden in electronic phenomena .
there s a reversespeech .com web page where i downloaded this stuff .
this is the most famous one of all of these .
here s the forward version of the very famous song .
yes there are two paths you can go by but in the long run there s still time to change the road you re on .
couldn t you just listen to that all day ? all right here it is backwards 
and see if you can hear the hidden messages that are supposedly in there .
satan !
what did you get ? audience satan ! satan . ok at least we got satan .
now i ll prime the auditory part of your brain to tell you what you re supposed to hear and then hear it again .
you can t miss it when i tell you what s there .
i m going to just end with a positive nice little story . the skeptics is a nonprofit educational organization .
we re always looking for little good things that people do .
and in england there s a pop singer .
one of the top popular singers in england today katie melua .
and she wrote a beautiful song .
it was in the top five in called nine million bicycles in beijing . 
it s a love story she s sort of the norah jones of the uk about how she much loves her guy and compared to nine million bicycles and so forth .
in america it d be we re light years from the edge . 
but my friend simon singh the particle physicist now turned science educator who wrote the book the big bang and so on 
uses every chance he gets to promote good science .
and so he wrote an op ed piece in the guardian about katie s song in which he said well we know exactly how far from the edge .
you know it s . billion light years and it s not a guess .
we know within precise error bars how close it is .
so we can say although not absolutely true it s pretty close to being true .
and to his credit katie called him up after this op ed piece came out and said i m so embarrassed . i was in the astronomy club .
i should ve known better . 
and she re cut the song .
so i will end with the new version .
we are . billion light years from the edge of the observable universe . that s a good estimate with well defined error bars . and with the available information i predict that i will always be with you . how cool is that ?
i love trees and i m very lucky because we live near a wonderful arboretum 
and sundays usually i d go there with my wife and now with my four year old and we d climb in the trees we d play hide and seek .
the second school i was at had big trees too had a fantastic tulip tree i think it was the biggest in the country and it also had a lot of wonderful bushes and vegetation around it around the playing fields .
one day i was grabbed by some of my classmates and taken in the bushes i was stripped i was attacked i was abused and this came out of the blue .
now the reason i say that because afterwards i was thinking well i went back into the school i felt dirty i felt betrayed i felt ashamed but mainly mainly i felt powerless .
and years later i was sitting in an airplane next to a lady called veronica who came from chile and we were on a human rights tour and she was starting to tell me what it was like to be tortured 
and from my very privileged position this was the only reference point that i had .
and it was an amazing learning experience because for me human rights have been something in which i had you know a part time interest but mainly it was something that happened to other people over there .
who d watched their family being shot in front of them who d had a partner thrown out of an airplane into an ocean 
and suddenly this world of human rights arrived in my world and i couldn t really walk away in quite the same way as before .
so i got involved with this tour which was for amnesty and then in i took over bono s job trying to learn how to hustle .
i didn t do it as well but we managed to get youssou n dour sting tracy chapman and bruce springsteen to go round the world for amnesty 
and it was an amazing experience .
and once again i got an extraordinary education 
and it was the first time really that i d met a lot of these people in the different countries 
and these human rights stories became very physical and again i couldn t really walk away quite so comfortably .
but the thing that really amazed me that i had no idea was that you could suffer in this way and then have your whole experience your story denied buried and forgotten .
and it seemed that whenever there was a camera around or a video or film camera it was a great deal harder to do for those in power to bury the story .
and reebok set up a foundation after these human rights now tours and there was a decision then well we made a proposal for a couple of years about trying to set up a division that was going to give cameras to human rights activists .
it didn t really get anywhere and then the rodney king incident happened and people thought ok if you have a camera in the right place at the right time or perhaps the wrong time depending who you are then you can actually start doing something 
and campaigning and being heard 
and telling people about what s going on .
so witness was started in 
and it s since given cameras out in over countries .
and we campaign with activist groups and help them tell their story and in fact 
i will show you in a moment one of the most recent campaigns 
and i m afraid it s a story from uganda and although we had a wonderful story from uganda yesterday this one isn t quite so good .
in the north of uganda there are something like . million internally displaced people people who are not refugees in another country but because of the civil war which has been going on for about years they have nowhere to live .
and kids have been taken away to become child soldiers 
and the international criminal court is going after five of the leaders of the now what s it called ?
i forget the name of the of the army it s lord s resistance army i believe 
but the government also doesn t have a clean sheet 
so if we could run the first video .
woman life in the camp is never simple . even today life is difficult .
we stay because of the fear that what pushed us into the camp . . . still exists back home .
text between two fires torture and displacement in northern uganda 
man when we were at home it was kony s rebel soldiers disturbing us .
at first we were safe in the camp .
but later the government soldiers began mistreating us a lot .
jennifer a soldier walked onto the road asking where we d been .
evelyn and i hid behind my mother .
evelyn he ordered us to sit down so we sat down .
the other soldier also came .
jennifer the man came and started undressing me .
the other one carried evelyn aside .
the one who was defiling me then left me and went to rape evelyn .
and the one who was raping evelyn came and defiled me also .
man the soldiers with clubs this long beat us to get a confession .
they kept telling us tell the truth ! as they beat us .
woman they insisted that i was lying .
at that moment they fired and shot off my fingers .
i fell . they ran to join the others . . . leaving me for dead .
text uganda ratified the convention against torture in .
torture is defined as any act by which severe pain of suffering whether physical or mental is intentionally inflicted by a person acting in an official capacity to obtain information or a confession to punish coerce or intimidate .
peter gabriel so torture is not something that always happens on other soil .
in my country it was we had been looking at pictures of british soldiers beating up young iraqis 
we ve got abu ghraib we ve got guantanamo bay .
because he had the same he was middle eastern and he had the same name as one of the pilots 
and that may or may not be true i didn t think he was a liar though .
and i think if we look around the world as well as the polar ice caps melting human rights which have been fought for for many hundreds of years in some cases are also eroding very fast 
and that is something that we need to take a look at and maybe start campaigning for .
i mean here too one of our partners was at van jones
and the books not bars project they have managed with their footage in california to change the youth correction systems employed 
and it s much much i think more humane methods are being looked at how you should lock up young kids and that s questionable to start off .
and as the story of mr . morales just down the road excuse me mr . gabriel would you mind if we delayed your execution a little bit ?
no not at all no problem take your time .
but this surely whoever that man is whatever he s done this is cruel and unusual punishment .
anyway witness has been trying to arm the brave people who often put their lives at risk around the world with cameras 
and i d like to show you just a little more of that . thank you .
text you can say a story is fabricated .
text you can say a jury is corrupt .
you can say a person is lying .
you can say you don t trust newspapers .
but you can t say what you just saw never happened .
help witness give cameras to the world .
shoot a video 
expose injustice 
reveal the truth 
show us what s wrong with the world 
and maybe we can help make it right .
witness .
all the video you have just seen was recorded by human rights groups working with witness .
pg witness was born of technological innovation 
in a sense the small portable dv cam was really what allowed it to come into being .
and we ve also been trying to get computers out to the world so that groups can communicate much more effectively campaign much more effectively 
but now we have the wonderful possibility which is given to us from the mobile phone with the camera in it because that is cheap it s ubiquitous and it s moving fast all around the world and it s very exciting for us .
if we can move that into these sort of fields i think we can really transform the world in all sorts of ways .
there could be a new movement growing up rising from the ground reaching for the light and growing strong just like a tree . thank you .
i m rich baraniuk and what i d like to talk a little bit about today
are some ideas that i think have just tremendous resonance with all the things that have been talked about the last two days .
so many different points of resonance that it s going to be difficult to bring them all up but i ll try to do my best .
does anybody remember these ?
ok so these are lp records and they ve been replaced right ?
they ve been swept away over the last two decades by these types of world flattening digitization technologies right ?
and i think it was best witnessed when thomas was playing the music as we came in the room today .
what s happened in the music world is there s a culture or an ecosystem that s been created that if you take some words from apple the catchphrase that we create rip mix and burn .
what i mean by that is that anyone in the world is free and allowed to create new music and musical ideas .
anyone in the world is allowed to rip or copy musical ideas use them in innovative ways .
anyone is allowed to mix them in different types of ways draw connections between musical ideas and people can burn them or create final products and continue the circle .
and what that s done is it s created like i said a vibrant community that s very inclusive with people continually working to connect musical ideas innovate them and keep things constantly up to date .
today s hit single is not last year s hit single .
but i m not here to talk about music today .
i m here to talk about books .
in particular textbooks and the kind of educational materials that we use every day in school .
has anyone here ever been to school ?
ok does anybody realize there s a crisis in our schools around the world ?
i m not going to spend too much time on that 
but what i want to talk about is some of the disconnects that appear when an author publishes a book .
that in fact the publishing process just because of the fact that it s complicated it s heavy books are expensive 
creates a sort of a wall between authors of books and the ultimate users of books be they teachers students or just general readers .
and this is even more true if you happen to speak a language other than one of the world s major languages and especially english .
i m going to call these people below the barrier shutouts because they re really shut out of the process of being able to share their knowledge with the world .
and so what i want to talk about today is trying to take these ideas that we ve seen in the musical culture and try to bring these towards reinventing the way we think about writing books using them and teaching from them .
so that s what i d like to talk about and really how we get from where we are now to where we need to go .
the first thing i d like you to do is a little thought experiment .
imagine taking all the world s books .
ok everybody imagine books and imagine just tearing out the pages .
so liberating these pages and imagine digitizing them and then storing them in a vast interconnected global repository .
think of it as a massive itunes for book type content .
and then take that material and imagine making it all open so that people can modify it play with it improve it .
imagine making it free so that anyone in the world can have access to all of this knowledge and imagine using information technology so that you can update this content improve it play with it on a timescale that s more on the order of seconds instead of years .
instead of editions of a book coming out every two years imagine them coming out every seconds .
so imagine we could do that and imagine we could put people into this .
so that we could truly build an ecosystem with not just authors but all the people who could be or want to be authors in all the different languages of the world 
and i think if you could do this it would be called i m just going to refer to it as a knowledge ecosystem .
so really this is the dream 
and in a sense what you can think of it is we re trying to enable anyone in the world i mean anyone in the world to be their own educational dj creating educational materials sharing them with the world constantly innovating on them . so this is the dream .
in fact this dream is actually being realized .
over the last six and a half years we ve been working really hard at rice university on a project called connexions 
and so what i d like to do for the rest of the talk is just tell you a little bit about what people are doing with connexions which you can kind of think of as the counterpoint to nicholas negroponte s talk yesterday 
where they re working on the hardware of bringing education to the world . we re working on the open source tools
and the content .
so that s sort of to put it in perspective here .
so create . what are some of the people that are using these kind of tools ?
well the first thing is there s a community of engineering professors from cambridge to kyoto who are developing engineering content in electrical engineering
to develop what you can think of as a massive super textbook that covers the entire area of electrical engineering .
and not only that it can be customized for use in each of their own individual institutions .
if people like kitty jones a shut out a private music teacher and mom from champagne illinois who wanted to share her fantastic music content with the world on how to teach kids how to play music 
her material is now used over times per month .
tremendous use .
in fact a lot of this use coming from united states k schools because anyone who s involved in a school scale back the first thing that s cut is the music curriculum .
and so this is just indicating the tremendous thirst for this kind of open free content .
a lot of teachers are using this stuff .
what about ripping ? what about copying reusing ?
a team of volunteers at the university of texas at el paso graduate students translating this engineering super textbook ideas .
and within about a week having this be some of our most popular material in widespread use all over latin america and in particular in mexico because of the open extensible nature of this .
people volunteers and even companies that are translating materials into asian languages like chinese japanese and thai to spread the knowledge even further .
ok what about people who are mixing ? what does mixing mean ?
 mixing means building customized courses means building customized books .
we ve been working with teachers without borders who are very interested in mixing our materials . they re going to be using connexions as their platform to develop and deliver teaching materials for teaching teachers how to teach in countries around the world .
twb is currently in iraq training teachers supported by usaid .
and to them this idea of being able to remix and customize to the local context is extraordinarily important 
because just providing free content to people has actually been likened by people in the developing world to a kind of cultural imperialism 
that if you don t empower people with the ability to re contextualize the material translate it into their own language and take ownership of it it s not good .
ok other organizations we ve been working with uc merced people know about uc merced .
it s a new university in california in the central valley working very closely with community colleges .
they re actually developing a lot of their science and engineering curriculum to spread widely around the world in our system .
and they re also trying to develop all of their software tools completely open source .
we ve been working with amd which has a project called x which is trying to bring internet connectivity to percent of the world s population by .
we re going to be providing content to them in a whole range of different languages .
and we ve also been working with a number of other organizations .
in particular a bunch of the projects that are funded by hewlett foundation who have taken a real leadership role in this area of open content .
ok burn i think this is sort of quite interesting .
 burn is the idea of trying to create the physical instantiation of one of these courses .
and i think a lot of you received i think all of you received one of these music books in your gift pack .
a little present for you .
just to tell you quickly about it this is an engineering textbook .
it s about pages long hardbound .
this costs anybody guess ?
how much would it cost in a bookstore ?
 dollars .
richard baraniuk ok . this costs dollars to the student .
why does it cost dollars ?
because it s published on demand and it s developed from this repository of open materials .
if this book were to be published by a regular publisher it would cost at least dollars .
and i think that this is an extraordinarily interesting area because there is tremendous area under this long tail in publishing .
we re not talking about the harry potter end right at the left side .
we re talking about books on hypergeometric partial differential equations .
books that might sell copies a year copies a year .
there is tremendous sustaining revenue under this long tail to sustain open projects like ours but also to sustain this new emergence of on demand publishers like qoop who produced these two books .
and i think one of the things that you should take away from this talk is that there s an impending cut out the middle man disintermediation 
that s going to be happening in the publishing industry .
and it s going to reach a crescendo over the next few years 
and i think that it s for our benefit really and for the world s benefit .
ok so what are the enablers ?
what s really making all of this happen ?
there s tons of technology 
and the only piece of technology that i really want to talk about is xml .
how many people know about xml ?
oh great . so it s the future of the web right ?
it s semantic representation of content .
and what you can really think of xml in this case is it s the packaging that we re putting around these pages .
remember we took the book tore the pages out ?
well what the xml is going to do is it s going to turn those pages into lego blocks .
xml are the nubs on the lego that allow us to combine the content together in a myriad different ways 
and it provides us a framework to share content .
so it lets you take this ecosystem in its primordial state of all this content all the pages you ve torn out of books and create highly sophisticated learning machines books courses course packs .
it gives you the ability to personalize the learning experience to each individual student so that every student can have a book or a course that s customized to their learning style their context their language and the things that excite them .
it lets you reuse the same materials in multiple different ways and surprising new ways .
it lets you interconnect ideas indicating how fields relate to each other .
and i ll just give you my personal story .
we came up with this six and a half years ago because i teach the stuff in the red box .
and my day job as chris said i m an electrical engineering professor .
i teach signal processing
and the thing that i realized is there was no way that i as an engineer could write this book that would get all of this across .
we needed a community to do it and we needed new tools to be able to interconnect these ideas .
and i think that really in a sense what we re trying to do is make minsky s dream come to a reality where you can imagine all the books in a library actually starting to talk to each other .
and people who are teachers out here whoever taught you know this it s the interconnections between ideas that teaching is really all about .
ok back to math . imagine this is possible that every single equation that you click on in one of your new e texts is something that you re going to be able to explore and experiment with .
so imagine your kid s algebra textbook in seventh grade .
you can click on every single equation and bring up a little tool to be able to experiment with it tinker with it understand it . because we really don t understand until we do .
the same type of mark up like mathml for chemistry .
imagine chemistry textbooks that actually understand the structure of how molecules are formed .
imagine music xml that actually lets you delve into the semantic structure of music play with it understand it .
it s no wonder that everybody s getting into it right ?
even the three wise men .
ok the second big enabler and this is where i told a big lie . the second big enabler is intellectual property .
because in fact i got up here and i talked about how great the music culture is .
we can share and rip mix and burn but in fact that s all illegal .
and we would be accused of piracy for doing that because this music has been propertized .
it s now owned much of it by big industries .
so really the key thing here is we can t let this happen .
we can t let this napster thing happen here .
so what we have to do is get it right from the very beginning .
and what we have to do is find an intellectual property framework that makes sharing safe and makes it easily understandable . and the inspiration here is taken from open source software . things like linux and the gpl .
the creative commons licenses .
how many people have heard of creative commons ?
if you have not you must learn about it . creativecommons .org .
at the bottom of every piece of material in connexions and in lots of other projects you can find their logo .
clicking on that logo takes you to an absolute no nonsense human readable document a deed that tells you exactly what you can do with this content .
in fact you re free to share it to do all of these things to copy it to change it even to make commercial use of it as long as you attribute the author .
because in academic publishing and much of educational publishing it s really this idea of sharing knowledge and making impact . that s why people write not necessarily making bucks .
we re not talking about harry potter right ?
we re at the long tail end here .
behind that is the legal code very carefully constructed .
and creative commons is taking off over million things out there licensed with a creative commons license .
not just text but music images video .
and there s actually a tremendous uptake of the number of people that are actually licensing music to make it free for people who do this whole idea of re sampling ripping mixing burning and sharing .
ok i d like to conclude with just the last few points .
so we ve built this idea of a commons . people are using it .
we get over unique visitors per month just to our particular site .
mit opencourseware which is another large open content site gets a similar number of hits . but how do we protect this ?
how do we protect it into the future ?
and the first thing that people are probably thinking is quality control right ?
because we re saying that anybody can contribute things to this commons . anybody can contribute anything .
so that could be a problem .
it didn t take long until people started contributing materials for example on lingerie which is actually a pretty good module .
the only problem is it s plagiarized from a major french feminist journal 
and when you go to the supposed course website it points to a lingerie selling website .
so this is a little bit of a problem . so we clearly need some kind of idea of quality control
and this is really where the idea of review and peer review comes in .
you come to ted . why do you come to ted ?
because chris and his team have ensured that things are very very high quality right ?
and so we need to be able to do the same thing .
and we need to be able to design structures 
and what we re doing is designing social software to enable anyone to build their own peer review process 
and we call these things lenses . 
and basically what they allow is anyone out there can develop their own peer review process so that they can focus on the content in the repository that they think is really important .
and you can think of ted as a potential lens .
so i d just like to end by saying you can really view this as a call to action .
connexions and open content is all about sharing knowledge .
all of you here are tremendously imbued with tremendous amounts of knowledge 
and what i d like to do is invite each and every one of you to contribute to this project and other projects of its type 
because i think together we can truly change the landscape of education and educational publishing .
so thanks very much .
take the money go to amazon buy a phonebook for a country you ve never been to call folks at random until you find someone who flirts really well in a foreign language .
if i were in charge of the internet you could mapquest your lover s mood swings .
hang left at cranky right at preoccupied u turn on silent treatment all the way back to tongue kissing and good lovin . you could navigate and understand every emotional intersection .
some days i m as shallow as a baking pan but i still stretch miles in all directions .
if i owned the internet napster monster and friendster .com would be one big website .
that way you could listen to cool music while you pretend to look for a job and you re really just chattin with your pals .
heck if i ran the web you could email dead people .
they would not email you back but you d get an automated reply .
their name in your inbox it s all you wanted anyway .
and a message saying hey it s me . i miss you .
listen you ll see being dead is dandy .
now you go back to raising kids and waging peace and craving candy . if i designed the internet childhood .com would be a loop of a boy in an orchard with a ski pole for a sword trashcan lid for a shield shouting i am the emperor of oranges .
i am the emperor of oranges . i am the emperor of oranges . now follow me ok ?
grandma .com would be a recipe for biscuits and spit bath instructions .
one two three .
that links with hotdiggitydog .com . that is my grandfather .
they take you to gruff ex cop on his fourth marriage .dad . he forms an attachment to kind of ditzy but still sends ginger snaps for christmas .mom who downloads the boy in the orchard the emperor of oranges who grows up to be me the guy who usually goes too far .
so if i were emperor of the internet i guess i d still be mortal huh ?
but at that point i would probably already have the lowest possible mortgage and the most enlarged possible penis so i would outlaw spam on my first day in office .
i wouldn t need it .
i d be like some kind of internet genius and me i d like to upgrade to deity and maybe just like that pop ! i d go wireless .
huh ? maybe google would hire this .
i guess it s just like life .
it is not a question of if you can 
it s do ya ?
we can interfere with the interface .
we can make you ve got hallelujah the national anthem of cyberspace every lucky time we log on .
you don t say a prayer .
you don t write a psalm .
you don t chant an om . 
you send one blessed email to whomever you re thinking of at dah da la dat da dah da la dat .com .
thank you ted .
my name is lovegrove . i only know nine lovegroves two of which are my parents .
they are first cousins and you know what happens when you know so there s a terribly weird freaky side to me which i m fighting with all the time . so to try and get through today i ve kind of disciplined myself with an minute talk .
i was hanging on to have a pee . i thought perhaps if i was hanging on long enough that would guide me through the minutes .
ok . i am known as captain organic and that s a philosophical position as well as an aesthetic position .
but today what i d like to talk to you about is that love of form and how form can touch people s soul and emotion .
not very long ago not many thousands of years ago we actually lived in caves and i don t think we ve lost that coding system .
we respond so well to form . but i m interested in creating intelligent form .
i m not interested at all in blobism or any of that superficial rubbish that you see coming out as design .
this artificially induced consumerism i think it s atrocious .
janine benyus james watson .
i m in that world but i work purely instinctively .
i m not a scientist . i could have been perhaps but i work in this world where i trust my instincts .
so i am a st century translator of technology into products that we use everyday and relate beautifully and naturally with .
and we should be developing things we should be developing packaging for ideas which elevate people s perceptions and respect for the things that we dig out of the earth and translate into products for everyday use .
so the water bottle .
i ll begin with this concept of what i call dna .
dna design nature art . these are the three things that condition my world .
here is a drawing by leonardo da vinci years ago before photography . it shows how observation curiosity and instinct
work to create amazing art .
industrial design is the art form of the st century .
people like leonardo there have not been many had this amazingly instinctive curiosity .
i work from a similar position .
i don t want to sound pretentious saying that but this is my drawing made on a digital pad a couple of years ago well into the st century years later .
it s my impression of water .
impressionism being the most valuable art form on the planet as we know it 
 million dollars easily for a monet .
i use now a whole new process .
a few years ago i reinvented my process to keep up with people like greg lynn thom mayne zaha hadid rem koolhaas 
all these people that i think are persevering and pioneering with fantastic new ideas of how to create form .
this is all created digitally .
here you see the machining the milling of a block of acrylic .
this is what i show to the client to say that s what i want to do . 
at that point i don t know if that s possible at all .
it s a seductor but i just feel in my bones that that s possible .
so we go we look at the tooling . we look at how that is produced .
these are the invisible things that you never see in your life .
this is the background noise of industrial design .
that is like an anish kapoor flowing through a richard serra .
it is more valuable than the product in my eyes . i don t have one .
when i do make some money i ll have one machined for myself .
this is the final product . when they sent it to me i thought i d failed .
it felt like nothing . it has to feel like nothing .
it was when i put the water in that i realized that i d put a skin on water itself .
it s an icon of water itself and it elevates people s perception of contemporary design .
each bottle is different meaning the water level will give you a different shape .
it s mass individualism from a single product . it fits the hand .
it fits arthritic hands . it fits children s hands .
it makes the product strong the tessellation .
it s a millefiori of ideas .
in the future they will look like that because we need to move away from those type of polymers and use that for medical equipment and more important things perhaps in life .
biopolymers these new ideas for materials will come into play in probably a decade .
it doesn t look as cool does it ?
but i can live up to that . i don t have a problem with that .
i design for that condition biopolymers . it s the future .
i took this video in cape town last year .
this is the freaky side coming out .
i have this special interest in things like this which blow my mind .
i don t know whether to you know drop to my knees cry 
i don t know what i think . but i just know that nature nature improves with ever greater purpose that which once existed and that strangeness is a consequence of innovative thinking .
when i look at these things they look pretty normal to me .
but these things evolved over many years and what we re trying to do i get three weeks to design a telephone . how the hell do i do that when you get these things that take hundreds of millions of years to evolve ?
how do you condense that ? it comes back to instinct .
i m not talking about designing telephones that look like that and i m not looking at designing architecture like that .
i m just interested in natural growth patterns and the beautiful forms that only nature really creates .
how that flows through me and how that comes out is what i m trying to understand .
this is a scan through the human forearm . it s then blown up through rapid prototyping to reveal its cellular structure . i have these in my office .
my office is a mixture of the natural history museum and a nasa space lab .
it s a weird kind of freaky place .
this is one of my specimens .
this is made bone is made from a mixture of inorganic minerals and polymers .
i studied cooking in school for four years and in that experience which was called domestic science it was a bit of a cheap trick for me to try and get a science qualification .
actually i put marijuana in everything i cooked and i had access to all the best girls . it was fabulous .
all the guys in the rugby team couldn t understand . anyway this is a meringue . this is another sample i have .
a meringue is made exactly the same way in my estimation as a bone .
it s made from polysaccharides and proteins .
if you pour water on that it dissolves .
could we be manufacturing from foodstuffs in the future ?
not a bad idea . i don t know . i need to talk to janine and a few other people about that but i believe instinctively that that meringue can become something a car i don t know .
i m also interested in growth patterns the unbridled way that nature grows things so you re not restricted by form at all .
these interrelated forms they do inspire everything i do although i might end up making something incredibly simple .
this is a detail of a chair that i ve designed in magnesium .
it shows this interlocution of elements and the beauty of kind of engineering and biological thinking shown pretty much as a bone structure .
any one of those elements you could sort of hang on the wall as some kind of art object .
it s the world s first chair made in magnesium .
it cost . million dollars to develop . it s called go by bernhardt usa .
it went into time magazine in as the new language of the st century .
boy . for somebody growing up in wales in a little village that s enough .
it shows how you make one holistic form like the car industry and then you break up what you need .
this is an absolutely beautiful way of working .
it s a godly way of working .
it s organic and it s essential .
it s an absolutely fat free design and when you look at it you see human beings .
when that moves into polymers you can change the elasticity the fluidity of the form .
this is an idea for a gas injected one piece polymer chair .
what nature does is it drills holes in things . it liberates form .
it takes away anything extraneous . that s what i do .
i make organic things which are essential .
and they look funky too but i don t set out to make funky things
because i think that s an absolute disgrace . i set out to look at natural forms .
if you took the idea of fractal technology further take a membrane shrinking it down constantly like nature does that could be a seat for a chair . it could be a sole for a sports shoe . it could be a car blending into seats .
wow . let s go for it . that s the kind of stuff .
this is what exists in nature . observation now allows us to bring that natural process into the design process every day . that s what i do .
this is a show that s currently on in tokyo .
it s called superliquidity . it s my sculptural investigation .
it s like st century henry moore . when you see a henry moore still your hair stands up . there s some amazing spiritual connect .
if he was a car designer phew we d all be driving one .
in his day he was the highest taxpayer in britain .
that is the power of organic design .
it contributes immensely to our sense of being our sense of relationships with things our sensuality and you know the sort of even the sort of socio erotic side which is very important .
this is my artwork . this is all my process .
these actually are sold as artwork . they re very big prints .
but this is how i get to that object .
ironically that object was made by the killarney process which is a brand new process here for the st century 
and i can hear greg lynn laughing his socks off as i say that .
i ll tell you about that later .
when i look into these data images i see new things .
it s self inspired . diatomic structures radiolaria the things that we couldn t see but we can do now these again are cored out . they re made virtually from nothing . they re made from silica .
why not structures from cars like that ?
coral all these natural forces take away what they don t need and they deliver maximum beauty .
we need to be in that realm . i want to do stuff like that .
this is a new chair which should come on the market in september .
it s for a company called moroso in italy . it s a gas injected polymer chair .
those holes you see there are very filtered down watered down versions of the extremity of the diatomic structures .
it goes with the flow of the polymer and you ll see there s an image coming up right now that shows the full thing .
it s great to have companies in italy who support this way of dreaming .
if you see the shadows that come through that they re actually probably more important than the product but it s the minimum it takes .
the coring out of the back lets you breathe .
it takes away any material you don t need and it actually garners flexure too .
i was going to break into a dance then .
this is some current work i m doing .
i m looking at single surface structures and how they stretch and flow . it s based on furniture typologies but that s not the end motivation . it s made from aluminum . . . as opposed to aluminium and it s grown .
it s grown in my mind and then it s grown in terms of the whole process that i go through .
this is two weeks ago in ccp in coventry who build parts for bentleys and so on .
it s being built as we speak and it will be on show in phillips next year in new york .
i have a big show with phillips auctioneers .
when i see these animations oh jesus i m blown away .
this is what goes on in my studio everyday . i walk i m traveling . i come back .
some guy s got that on a computer there s this like oh my goodness .
so i try to create this energy of invention every day in my studio .
this kind of effervescent fully charged sense of soup that delivers ideas .
single surface products . furniture s a good one .
how you grow legs out of a surface .
i would love to build this one day and perhaps i d like to build it also out of flour sugar polymer wood chips i don t know human hair .
i don t know . i d love a go at that . i don t know . if i just got some time .
that s the weird side coming out again . a lot of companies don t understand that .
three weeks ago i was with sony in tokyo .
they said give us the dream . what is our dream ? how do we beat apple ? 
i said you don t copy apple that s for sure .
you get into biopolymers . they looked straight through me .
what a waste . anyway . no it s true . fuck them . you know i mean 
i m delivering they re not taking . i ve had this image years .
i ve had this image of a water droplet for years sitting on a hot bed .
that is an image of a car for me .
that s the car of the future . it s a water droplet .
i ve been banging on about this like i can t believe .
cars are all wrong .
i m going to show you something a bit weird now .
they laughed everywhere over the world i showed this .
the only place that didn t laugh was moscow .
cars are made from components .
how ridiculous is that ? couldn t you make that from ?
it s got a vacuum formed carbon nylon pan .
everything s holistically integrated . it opens and closes like a bread bin . there is no engine . there s a solar panel on the back
and there are batteries in the wheels they re fitted like formula .
you take them off your wall you plug them in . off you go .
a three wheeled car slow feminine transparent so you can see the people in there .
you drive different . you see that thing . you do . you do .
and not anesthetized separated from life .
there s a hole at the front and there s a reason for that .
it s a city car . you drive along . you get out .
you drive on to a proboscis . you get out .
it lifts you up . it presents the solar panel to the sun and at night it s a street lamp .
that s what happens if you get inspired by the street lamp first and do the car second . i can see these bubbles with these hydrogen packages floating around on the ground driven by ai .
when i showed this in south africa everybody afterwards was going hey car on a stick . like this . 
can you imagine ? a car on a stick .
if you put it next to contemporary architecture it feels totally natural to me .
and that s what i do with my furniture .
i m not putting charles eames furniture in buildings anymore .
i m trying to build furniture which fits architecture .
i m trying to build transportation systems .
i work on aircraft for airbus i do all this sort of stuff trying to force these natural inspired by nature dreams home . i m going to finish on two things .
this is the stereolithography of a staircase .
it s a little bit of a dedication to james james watson .
i built this thing for my studio .
it cost me dollars to build this .
most people go and buy the aston martin . i built this .
this is the data that goes with that . incredibly complex .
took about two years because i m looking for fat free design .
lean efficient things . healthy products .
this is built by composites . it s a single element which rotates around to create a holistic element 
and this is a carbon fiber handrail which is only supported in two places .
modern materials allow us to do modern things .
this is a shot in the studio .
this is how it looks pretty much every day .
you wouldn t want to have a fear of heights coming down it .
there is virtually no handrail . it doesn t pass any standards .
who cares ?
and it has an internal handrail which gives it its strength .
it s this holistic integration . that s my studio . it s subterranean .
it s in notting hill next to all the crap the prostitutes and all that stuff .
it s next to david hockney s original studio .
it has a lighting system that changes throughout the day .
my guys go out for lunch . the door s open . they come back in because it s normally raining and they prefer to stay in .
this is my studio . elephant skull from oxford university .
i bought that last year . they re very difficult to find .
if anybody s got a whale skeleton they want to sell me i ll put it in the studio .
so i m just going to interject a little bit with some of the things that you ll see in the video .
it s a homemade video made it myself at three o clock in the morning just to show you how my real world is . you never see that .
you never see architects or designers showing you their real world .
this is called a plasnet . 
it s a new bio polycarbonate chair i m doing in italy .
world s first bamboo bike with folding handlebars . we should all be riding one of these .
counterbalance . like i say it s a cross between natural history museum and a nasa laboratory .
it s full of prototypes and objects . it s self inspirational again .
i mean the rare times when i m there i do enjoy it . and i get lots and lots of kids coming .
i m a contaminator for all those children of investment bankers wankers .
sorry . that s a solar seed . it s a concept for new architecture .
that thing on the top is the world s first solar powered garden lamp the first produced . giles revell should be talking here today amazing photography of things you can t see .
the first sculptural model i made for that thing in tokyo .
lots of stuff . there s a little leaf chair that golden looking thing is called leaf . 
it s made from kevlar .
on the wall is my book called supernatural which allows me to remember what i ve done because i forget .
there s an aerated brick i did in limoges last year 
in concepts for new ceramics in architecture .
gernot oberfell working at three o clock in the morning and i don t pay overtime .
overtime is the passion of design so join the club or don t . no it s true . people like tom and greg we re traveling like you can t we fit it all in . i don t know how we do it .
next week i m at electrolux in sweden then i m in beijing on friday . you work that one out .
and when i see ed s photographs i think why the hell am i going to china ? it s true . it s true .
because there s a soul in this whole thing .
we need to have a new instinct for the st century .
we need to combine all this stuff .
if all the people who were talking over this period worked on a car together it would be a joy absolute joy .
so there s a new x light system i m doing in japan .
there s tuareg shoes from north africa . there s a kifwebe mask .
these are my sculptures .
a copper jelly mold .
it sounds like some quiz show or something doesn t it ?
so it s going to end .
thank you james for your great inspiration .
thank you very much .
i m going to give you four specific examples i m going to cover at the end about how a company called silk tripled their sales 
how an artist named jeff koons went from being a nobody to making a whole bunch of money and having a lot of impact to how frank gehry redefined what it meant to be an architect .
and one of my biggest failures as a marketer in the last few years a record label i started that had a cd called sauce . 
before i can do that i ve got to tell you about sliced bread and a guy named otto rohwedder .
now before sliced bread was invented in the s i wonder what they said ?
like the greatest invention since the telegraph or something .
but this guy named otto rohwedder invented sliced bread and he focused like most inventors did on the patent part and the making part .
and the thing about the invention of sliced bread is this that for the first years after sliced bread was available no one bought it no one knew about it it was a complete and total failure .
and the reason is that until wonder came along and figured out how to spread the idea of sliced bread no one wanted it .
that the success of sliced bread like the success of almost everything we ve talked about at this conference is not always about what the patent is like or what the factory is like it s about can you get your idea to spread or not .
and i think that the way you re going to get what you want or cause the change that you want to change to happen is to figure out a way to get your ideas to spread .
and it doesn t matter to me whether you re running a coffee shop or you re an intellectual or you re in business or you re flying hot air balloons .
i think that all this stuff applies to everybody regardless of what we do .
that what we are living in is a century of idea diffusion .
that people who can spread ideas regardless of what those ideas are win .
when i talk about it i usually pick business because they make the best pictures that you can put in your presentation and because it s the easiest sort of way to keep score .
but i want you to forgive me when i use these examples because i m talking about anything that you decide to spend your time to do .
at the heart of spreading ideas is tv and stuff like tv .
tv and mass media made it really easy to spread ideas in a certain way .
i call it the tv industrial complex . 
the way the tv industrial complex works is you buy some ads interrupt some people that gets you distribution .
you use the distribution you get to sell more products .
you take the profit from that to buy more ads .
and it goes around and around and around the same way that the military industrial complex worked a long time ago .
if we did that then everyone would pay attention and we would win .
well this tv industrial complex informed my entire childhood and probably yours .
i mean all of these products succeeded because someone figured out how to touch people in a way they weren t expecting in a way they didn t necessarily want with an ad over and over again until they bought it .
and the thing that s happened is they canceled the tv industrial complex .
that just over the last few years what anybody who markets anything has discovered is that it s not working the way that it used to .
this picture is really fuzzy i apologize i had a bad cold when i took it .
but the product in the blue box in the center is my poster child .
i go to the deli i m sick i need to buy some medicine .
the brand manager for that blue product spent million dollars trying to interrupt me in one year .
 million dollars interrupting me with tv commercials and magazine ads and spam and coupons and shelving allowances and spiff all so i could ignore every single message .
and i ignored every message because i don t have a pain reliever problem .
i buy the stuff in the yellow box because i always have .
and i m not going to invest a minute of my time to solve her problem because i don t care .
here s a magazine called hydrate . it s pages about water .
articles about water ads about water .
imagine what the world was like years ago with just the saturday evening post and time and newsweek .
now there are magazines about water .
new product from coke japan water salad .
coke japan comes out with a new product every three weeks 
because they have no idea what s going to work and what s not .
i couldn t have written this better myself . it came out four days ago i circled the important parts so you can see them here .
they ve come out . . . arby s is going to spend million dollars promoting an oven mitt with the voice of tom arnold hoping that that will get people to go to arby s and buy a roast beef sandwich .
now i had tried to imagine what could possibly be in an animated tv commercial featuring tom arnold that would get you to get in your car drive across town and buy a roast beef sandwich .
now this is copernicus and he was right when he was talking to anyone who needs to hear your idea .
 the world revolves around me . me me me me . my favorite person me .
i don t want to get email from anybody i want to get memail . 
so consumers and i don t just mean people who buy stuff at the safeway i mean people at the defense department who might buy something or people at you know the new yorker who might print your article .
consumers don t care about you at all they just don t care .
part of the reason is they ve got way more choices than they used to and way less time .
and in a world where we have too many choices and too little time the obvious thing to do is just ignore stuff .
and my parable here is you re driving down the road and you see a cow and you keep driving because you ve seen cows before .
cows are invisible . cows are boring .
who s going to stop and pull over and say oh look a cow . nobody .
but if the cow was purple isn t that a great special effect ?
i could do that again if you want .
if the cow was purple you d notice it for a while .
i mean if all cows were purple you d get bored with those too .
the thing that s going to decide what gets talked about what gets done what gets changed what gets purchased what gets built is is it remarkable ? 
and remarkable is a really cool word because we think it just means neat but it also means worth making a remark about . 
and that is the essence of where idea diffusion is going .
that two of the hottest cars in the united states is a dollar giant car big enough to hold a mini in its trunk .
people are paying full price for both and the only thing they have in common is that they don t have anything in common .
every week the number one best selling dvd in america changes .
it s never the godfather it s never citizen kane it s always some third rate movie with some second rate star .
but the reason it s number one is because that s the week it came out .
because it s new because it s fresh .
people saw it and said i didn t know that was there and they noticed it .
two of the big success stories of the last years in retail one sells things that are super expensive in a blue box and one sells things that are as cheap as they can make them .
the only thing they have in common is that they re different .
we re now in the fashion business no matter what we do for a living we re in the fashion business .
and people in the fashion business know what it s like to be in the fashion business they re used to it .
the rest of us have to figure out how to think that way .
how to understand that it s not about interrupting people with big full page ads or insisting on meetings with people .
but it s a totally different sort of process that determines which ideas spread and which ones don t .
they sold a billion dollars worth of aeron chairs by reinventing what it meant to sell a chair .
they turned a chair from something the purchasing department bought to something that was a status symbol about where you sat at work .
this guy lionel poilane the most famous baker in the world he died two and a half months ago and he was a hero of mine and a dear friend .
he lived in paris . last year he sold million dollars worth of french bread .
every loaf baked in a bakery he owned by one baker at a time in a wood fired oven .
and when lionel started his bakery the french pooh pooh ed it .
they didn t want to buy his bread . it didn t look like french bread . 
it wasn t what they expected .
it was neat it was remarkable and slowly it spread from one person to another person until finally it became the official bread of three star restaurants in paris .
now he s in london and he ships by fedex all around the world .
what marketers used to do is make average products for average people .
that s what mass marketing is .
smooth out the edges go for the center that s the big market .
they would ignore the geeks and god forbid the laggards . it was all about going for the center .
but in a world where the tv industrial complex is broken i don t think that s a strategy we want to use any more .
i think the strategy we want to use is to not market to these people because they re really good at ignoring you .
but market to these people because they care .
these are the people who are obsessed with something .
and when you talk to them they ll listen because they like listening it s about them .
and if you re lucky they ll tell their friends on the rest of the curve and it ll spread .
it ll spread to the entire curve .
they have something i call otaku it s a great japanese word .
it describes the desire of someone who s obsessed to say drive across tokyo to try a new ramen noodle place because that s what they do they get obsessed with it .
to make a product to market an idea to come up with any problem you want to solve that doesn t have a constituency with an otaku is almost impossible .
instead you have to find a group that really desperately cares about what it is you have to say .
talk to them and make it easy for them to tell their friends .
there s a hot sauce otaku but there s no mustard otaku .
that s why there s lots and lots of kinds of hot sauces and not so many kinds of mustard .
not because it s hard to make interesting mustard you could make interesting mustard but people don t because no one s obsessed with it and thus no one tells their friends .
krispy kreme has figured this whole thing out .
it has a strategy and what they do is they enter a city they talk to the people with the otaku and then they spread through the city to the people who ve just crossed the street .
this yoyo right here cost dollars but it sleeps for minutes .
not everybody wants it but they don t care .
they want to talk to the people who do and maybe it ll spread .
these guys make the loudest car stereo in the world .
it s as loud as a jet . you can t get in the car s got bulletproof glass because it ll blow out the windshield otherwise .
but the fact remains that when someone wants to put a couple of speakers in their car if they ve got the otaku or they ve heard from someone who does they go ahead and they pick this .
it s really simple you sell to the people who are listening and just maybe those people tell their friends .
pearl jam albums released in the last two years .
every one made a profit . how ?
they only sell them on their website .
those people who buy them have the otaku and then they tell their friends and it spreads and it spreads .
this hospital crib cost dollars times the standard .
but hospitals are buying it faster than any other model .
hard candy nail polish doesn t appeal to everybody but to the people who love it they talk about it like crazy .
this paint can right here saved the dutch boy paint company making them a fortune . it costs percent more than regular paint because dutch boy made a can that people talk about because it s remarkable .
they didn t just slap a new ad on the product they changed what it meant to build a paint product .
amihotornot .com everyday people go to this site run by two volunteers and i can tell you they are hard graders they didn t get this way by advertising a lot .
they got this way by being remarkable sometimes a little too remarkable .
and this picture frame has a cord going out the back and you plug it into the wall .
my father has this on his desk and he sees his grandchildren everyday changing constantly .
and every single person who walks into his office hears the whole story of how this thing ended up on his desk .
and one person at a time the idea spreads .
these are not diamonds not really .
they re made from cremains . 
after you re cremated you can have yourself made into a gem .
oh you like my ring ? it s my grandmother .
fastest growing business in the whole mortuary industry .
but you don t have to be ozzie osborne you don t have to be super outrageous to do this . what you have to do
is figure out what people really want and give it to them .
a couple of quick rules to wrap up .
the first one is design is free when you get to scale .
the people who come up with stuff that s remarkable more often than not figure out how to put design to work for them .
number two the riskiest thing you can do now is be safe .
proctor and gamble knows this right ?
the whole model of being proctor and gamble is always about average products for average people .
that s risky . the safe thing to do now is to be at the fringes be remarkable .
and being very good is one of the worst things you can possibly do .
very good is boring . very good is average .
it doesn t matter whether you re making a record album or you re an architect or you have a tract on sociology .
if it s very good it s not going to work because no one s going to notice it .
so my three stories .
silk put a product that does not need to be in the refrigerated section next to the milk in the refrigerated section .
sales tripled . why ?
milk milk milk milk milk not milk .
for the people who were there and looking at that section it was remarkable .
they didn t triple their sales with advertising they tripled it by doing something remarkable .
that is a remarkable piece of art . you don t have to like it but a foot tall dog made out of bushes in the middle of new york city is remarkable .
frank gehry didn t just change a museum he changed an entire city s economy by designing one building that people from all over the world went to see .
now at countless meetings at you know the portland city council or who knows where they said we need an architect can we get frank gehry ?
because he did something that was at the fringes .
and my big failure ? i came out with an entire a record album and hopefully a whole bunch of record albums in sacd this remarkable new format and i marketed it straight to people with dollar stereos .
people with dollar stereos don t like new music .
so what you need to do is figure out who does care .
who is going to raise their hand and say i want to hear what you re doing next and sell something to them .
the last example i want to give you .
this is a map of soap lake washington .
as you can see if that s nowhere it s in the middle of it .
but they do have a lake .
and people used to come from miles around to swim in the lake .
they don t anymore . so the founding fathers said we ve got some money to spend .
what can we build here ? and like most committees they were going to build something pretty safe .
and then an artist came to them this is a true artist s rendering he wants to build a foot tall lava lamp in the center of town .
that s a purple cow that s something worth noticing .
i don t know about you but if they build it that s where i m going to go .
thank you very much for your attention .
you ll be happy to know that i ll be talking not about my own tragedy but other people s tragedy .
it s a lot easier to be lighthearted about other people s tragedy than your own and i want to keep it in the spirit of the conference .
so if you believe the media accounts being a drug dealer in the height of the crack cocaine epidemic was a very glamorous life in the words of virginia postrel .
there was money there was drugs guns women you know you name it jewelry bling bling it had it all .
but i think more realistically that being in a gang selling drugs for a gang is perhaps the worst job in all of america .
and that s what i d like to convince you of today .
so there are three things i want to do . first i want to explain how and why crack cocaine had such a profound influence on inner city gangs .
secondly i want to tell you how somebody like me came to be able to see
the inner workings of a gang an interesting story i think .
and then third i want to tell you in a very superficial way about some of the things we found when we actually got to look at the financial records the books of the gang .
so before i do that just one warning which is that this presentation has been rated r by the motion picture association of america .
it contains adult themes adult language .
given who is up on the stage you ll be delighted to know that in fact there ll be no nudity unexpected wardrobe malfunctions aside .
so let me start by talking about crack cocaine and how it transformed the gang .
to do that you have to actually go back to a time before crack cocaine in the early s and look at it from the perspective of a gang leader .
being a gang leader in the inner city wasn t such a bad deal in the mid s the early s let me say .
now you had a lot of power and you got to beat people up you got a lot of prestige a lot of respect .
but the thing is there was no money in it .
the gang had no way to make money .
you couldn t charge dues to the people in the gang because the people in the gang didn t have any money .
you couldn t really make any money selling marijuana 
marijuana s too cheap it turns out .
you can t get rich selling marijuana .
you couldn t sell cocaine 
cocaine s a great product powdered cocaine but you ve got to know rich white people .
and most of the inner city gang members didn t know any rich white people so couldn t sell to that market .
you couldn t really do petty crime either .
turns out petty crime s a terrible way to make a living .
as a result as a gang leader you had you know power 
it s a pretty good life but the thing was in the end 
you were living at home with your mother .
and so it wasn t really a career .
there were limits to how powerful and important you could be if you had to live at home with your mother .
then along comes crack cocaine .
and in the words of malcolm gladwell crack cocaine was the extra chunky version of tomato sauce for the inner city .
because crack cocaine was an unbelievable innovation .
i don t have time to talk about it today but if you think about it 
i would say that in the last years of every invention or innovation that s occurred in this country the biggest one in terms of impact on the well being of people who live in the inner city 
was crack cocaine .
and for the worse not for the better but for the worse . it had a huge impact on life .
so what was it about crack cocaine ?
it was a brilliant way of getting the brain high . because you could smoke crack cocaine you can t smoke powdered cocaine and smoking is a much more efficient mechanism of delivering a high than snorting it .
and it turned out there was this audience that didn t know it wanted crack cocaine but when it came it really did .
and it was a perfect drug you could buy the cocaine that went into it for a dollar sell it for five dollars .
highly addictive the high was very short .
so for fifteen minutes you get this great high and then when you come down all you want to do is get high again .
it created a wonderful market .
and for the people who were there running the gang it was a great way seemingly to make a lot of money .
at least for the people on the top .
so this is where we enter the picture .
not really me i m really a bit player in all this .
my co author sudhir venkatesh is the main character .
he was a math major in college who had a good heart and decided he wanted to get a sociology phd 
came to the university of chicago .
now the three months before he came to chicago he had spent following the grateful dead .
and in his own words he looked like a freak . 
he s a south asian very dark skinned south asian .
big man and he had hair in his words down to his ass . 
defied all kinds of boundaries was he black or white ? was he man or woman ?
he was really a curious sight to be seen .
so he showed up at the university of chicago and the famous sociologist william julius wilson was doing a book that involved surveying people all across chicago .
he took one look at sudhir who was going to go do some surveys for him and decided he knew exactly the place to send him which was to one of the toughest most notorious housing projects not just in chicago but in the entire united states .
so sudhir the suburban boy who had never really been in the inner city dutifully took his clipboard and walked down to this housing project 
gets to the first building .
the first building ? well there s nobody there .
but he hears some voices up in the stairwell 
so he climbs up the stairwell comes around the corner and finds a group of young african american men playing dice .
this is about peak of the crack epidemic .
this is a very dangerous job being in a gang .
you don t like to be surprised . you don t like to be surprised by people who come around the corner . and the mantra was shoot first ask questions later .
now sudhir was lucky he was such a freak and that clipboard probably saved his life because they figured no other rival gang member would be coming up to shoot at them with a clipboard .
so his greeting was not particularly warm but they did say well ok let s hear your questions on your survey .
so i kid you not the first question on the survey that he was sent to ask was how do you feel about being poor and black in america ? 
makes you wonder about academics .
so the choice of answers were a very good b good c bad d very bad 
what sudhir found out is in fact that the real answer was the following 
the survey was not in the end going to be what got sudhir off the hook .
he was held hostage overnight in the stairwell .
there was a lot of gunfire there were a lot of philosophical discussions he had with the gang members .
by morning the gang leader arrived 
checked out sudhir decided he was no threat and they let him go home .
so sudhir went home took a shower took a nap .
and you and i probably faced with the situation would think i guess i m going to write my dissertation on the grateful dead 
i ve been following them for the last three months . 
sudhir on the other hand got right back walked down to the housing project went up to the second floor and said hey guys i had so much fun hanging out with you last night i wonder if i could do it again tonight . 
but ultimately the story has a happy ending for sudhir who became one of the most respected sociologists in the country .
and especially for me as i sat in my office with my excel spreadsheet open waiting for sudhir to come and deliver to me the latest load of data that he would get from the gang .
it was one of the most unequal co authoring relationships ever but i was glad to be the beneficiary of it .
so what did we find ? what did we find in the gang ? well let me say one thing we really got access to everybody in the gang .
we got an inside look at the gang from the very bottom up to the very top .
they trusted sudhir in ways that really no academic has ever or really anybody any outsider has ever earned the trust of these gangs to the point where they actually opened up what was most interesting for me their books the financial records they kept .
they made them available to us and we not only could study them 
but we could ask them questions about what was in them .
in a lot of different respects the restaurant mcdonald s .
so first in one way which isn t maybe the most interesting way but it s a good way to start 
is in the way it s organized the hierarchy of the gang the way it looks .
so here s what the org chart of the gang looks like .
i don t know if you know much about org charts but if you were to assign a stripped down and simplified mcdonald s org chart this is exactly what it would look like .
it s amazing but the top level of the gang they actually call themselves the board of directors . 
and sudhir says it s not like these guys had a very sophisticated view of what happened in american corporate life 
but they had seen movies like wall street and they had learned a little bit about what it was like to be in the real world .
now below that board of directors you ve got essentially what are regional vps people who control say the south side of chicago or the west side of chicago .
sudhir got to know very well the guy who had the unfortunate assignment of trying to take the iowa franchise 
which it turned out for this black gang was not one of the more brilliant financial endeavors they undertook .
but the thing that really makes the gang seem like mcdonald s is its franchisees .
the guys who are running the local gangs the four square block by four square block areas they re just like the guys in some sense who are running the mcdonald s .
they are the entrepreneurs .
they get the exclusive property rights to control the drug selling .
they get the name of the gang behind them for merchandising and marketing .
and they re the ones who basically make the profit or lose a profit depending on how good they are at running the business .
now the group i really want you to think about though are the ones at the bottom the foot soldiers .
these are the teenagers typically who d be standing out on the street corner selling the drugs .
extremely dangerous work .
and important to note is that almost all of the weight all of the people in this organization are at the bottom just like mcdonald s .
so in some sense the foot soldiers are a lot like the people who are taking your order at mcdonald s 
and it s not just by chance that they re like them .
in fact in these neighborhoods they d be the same people .
so the same kids who are working in the gang were actually at the very same time typically working part time at a place like mcdonald s .
which already foreshadows the main result that i ve talked about about what a crappy job it was being in the gang .
because obviously if being in the gang were such a wonderful lucrative job why in the world would these guys moonlight at mcdonald s ?
so what do the wages look like ? you might be surprised .
but based on being able to talk to them and to see their records this is what it looks like in terms of the wages .
the hourly wage the foot soldiers were earning was . an hour .
it was below the minimum wage . and this is well documented .
it s easy to see by the patterns of consumption they have .
it really is not fiction it s fact .
there was very little money in the gang especially at the bottom .
now if you managed to rise up say and be that local leader the guy who s the equivalent of the mcdonald s franchisee you d be making dollars a year .
and that in some ways was the best job you could hope to get if you were growing up in one of these neighborhoods as a young black male .
if you managed to rise to the very top or dollars a year is what you d hope to make .
truly you would be a great success story .
and one of the sad parts of this is that indeed among the many other ramifications of crack cocaine is that the most talented individuals in these communities this is what they were striving for .
they weren t trying to make it in legitimate ways because there were no legitimate channels out .
this was the best way out .
and it actually was the right choice probably to try to make it out this way .
you look at this 
the relationship to mcdonald s breaks down here .
the money looks about the same .
why is it such a bad job ?
well the reason it s such a bad job is that there s somebody shooting at you a lot of the time .
so with shooting at you what are the death rates ?
we found in our gang and admittedly this was not really a standard situation 
this was a time of intense violence of a lot of gang wars as this gang actually became quite successful . but there were costs .
and so the death rate not to mention the rate of being arrested sent to prison being wounded the death rate in our sample was seven percent per person per year .
you re in the gang for four years you expect to die with about a percent likelihood .
that is about as high as you can get .
so for comparison s purposes let s think about some other walk of life you may expect might be extremely risky .
let s say that you were a murderer and you were convicted of murder and you re sent to death row .
it turns out the death rates on death row from all causes including execution two percent a year .
so it s a lot safer being on death row than it is selling drugs out on the street .
that gives you some pause for those of you who believe that a death penalty s going to have an enormous deterrent effect on crime .
that s extremely high .
and this is violent death it s unbelievable in some sense .
to put it into perspective if you compare this to the soldiers in iraq for instance right now fighting the war . percent .
so in some very literal way the young black men who were growing up in this country were living in a war zone very much in the sense that the soldiers over in iraq are fighting in a war .
so why in the world you might ask would anybody be willing to stand out on a street corner selling drugs for . an hour with a percent chance of dying over the next four years ?
why would they do that ? and i think there are a couple answers .
i think the first one is that they got fooled by history .
it used to be the gang was a rite of passage 
that the young people controlled the gang that as you got older you dropped out of the gang .
so what happened was the people who happened to be in the right place at the right time the people who happened to be leading the gang in the mid to late s became very very wealthy .
and so the logical thing to think was that they are going to age out of the gang like everybody else has and the next generation is going to take over and get the wealth .
there are striking similarities i think to the internet boom .
the first set of people in silicon valley got very very rich .
and then all of my friends said maybe i should go do that too . 
and they were willing to work very cheap for stock options that never came .
in some sense that s what happened exactly to the set of people we were looking at . they were willing to start at the bottom 
just like say a first year lawyer at a law firm is willing to start at the bottom work hour weeks for not that much money because they think they re going to make partner .
but the rules changed and they never got to make partner .
indeed the same people who were running all of the major gangs in the late s are still running the major gangs in chicago today .
they never passed on any of the wealth 
so everybody got stuck at that . an hour job and it turned out to be a disaster .
the other thing the gang was very good at was marketing and trickery .
and so for instance one thing the gang would do is the gang leaders would have big entourages and they d drive fancy cars and have fancy jewelry .
so what sudhir eventually realized as he hung out with them more is that really they didn t own those cars they just leased them 
because they couldn t afford to own the fancy cars .
and they didn t really have gold jewelry they had gold plated jewelry .
it goes back to you know the real real versus the fake real .
and really they did all sorts of things to trick the young people into thinking what a great deal the gang was going to be .
so for instance they would give a year old kid a whole roll of bills to hold .
that year old kid would say to his friends hey look at all the money i got in the gang . 
it wasn t his money until he spent it and then he was in debt to the gang 
and was sort of an indentured servant for a while .
so i have a couple minutes .
let me do one last thing i hadn t thought i d have time to do which is to talk about what we learned more generally about economics from the study of the gang .
so economists tend to talk in technical words .
often our theories fail quite miserably when we over the data 
but what s kind of interesting is that in this setting it turned out that some of the economic theories that worked not so well in the real economy worked very well in the drug economy in some sense because it s unfettered capitalism .
here s an economic principle .
this is one of the basic ideas in labor economics called a compensating differential . 
it s the idea that the increment to wages that a worker requires to leave him indifferent between performing two tasks one which is more unpleasant than the other .
compensating differential it s why we think garbagemen might be paid more than people who work in parks .
the words of one of the members of the gang i think make this clear .
so it turns out i m sort of getting ahead of myself 
it turns out in the gang when there s a war going on they actually pay the foot soldiers twice as much money .
it s exactly this concept .
because they re not willing to be at risk .
and the words of a gang member capture it quite nicely he says would you stand around here when all this shit . . . the shooting . . . if all this shit s going on ? no right ?
so if i gonna be asked to put my life on the line then front me the cash man . 
i think the gang member says it much more articulately than the economist about what s going on .
here s another one .
economists talk about game theory that every two person game has a nash equilibrium .
here s the translation you get from the gang member .
they re talking about the decision of why they don t go shoot 
one thing that turns out to be a great business tactic in the gang if you go and just shoot guns in the air in the other gang s territory people are afraid to go buy drugs there they re going to come into your neighborhood .
here s what he says about why they don t do that 
 if we start shooting around there the other gang s territory nobody i mean you dig it nobody gonna step on their turf .
but we gotta be careful cause they can shoot around here too and then we all fucked . 
so that s the same concept .
then again sometimes economists get it wrong .
one thing we observed in the data is that it looked like the gang leader always got paid .
no matter how bad it was economically he always got himself paid .
we had some theories related to cash flow and lack of access to capital markets and things like that .
then we asked the gang member why is it you always get paid and your workers don t always get paid ? 
his response is you got all these niggers below you who want your job you dig ?
if you start taking losses they see you as weak and shit . 
and i thought about it and said ceos often pay themselves million dollar bonuses even when companies are losing a lot of money .
and it never would really occur to an economist that this idea of weak and shit could really be important . 
maybe weak and shit is an important hypothesis that needs more analysis .
thank you very much .
once upon a time there was a dread disease that afflicted children .
and in fact among all the diseases that existed in this land it was the worst . it killed the most children .
and along came a brilliant inventor a scientist who came up with a partial cure for that disease .
and it wasn t perfect . many children still died but it was certainly better than what they had before .
and one of the good things about this cure was that it was free virtually free and was very easy to use .
but the worst thing about it was that you couldn t use it on the youngest children on infants and on one year olds .
and so as a consequence a few years later another scientist perhaps maybe this scientist not quite as brilliant as the one who had preceded him but building on the invention of the first one came up with a second cure .
and the beauty of the second cure for this disease was that it could be used on infants and one year olds .
and the problem with this cure was it was very expensive and it was very complicated to use .
and although parents tried as hard as they could to use it properly almost all of them ended up using it wrong in the end .
but what they did of course since it was so complicated and expensive they only used it on the zero year olds and the one year olds .
and they kept on using the existing cure that they had on the two year olds and up .
and this went on for quite some time . people were happy .
they had their two cures . until a particular mother whose child had just turned two died of this disease .
and she thought to herself my child just turned two and until the child turned two i had always used this complicated expensive cure you know this treatment .
and then the child turned two and i started using the cheap and easy treatment and i wonder 
and she wondered like all parents who lose children wonder if there isn t something that i could have done like keep on using that complicated expensive cure . 
and she told all the other people and she said how could it possibly be that something that s cheap and simple works as well as something that s complicated and expensive ? 
and the people thought you know you re right .
it probably is the wrong thing to do to switch and use the cheap and simple solution . 
and the government they heard her story and the other people and they said yeah you re right we should make a law .
we should outlaw this cheap and simple treatment and not let anybody use this on their children . 
and the people were happy . they were satisfied .
for many years this went along and everything was fine .
but then along came a lowly economist who had children himself and he used the expensive and complicated treatment .
but he knew about the cheap and simple one .
and lo and behold when he went through the data he found that it didn t look like the expensive complicated solution was any better than the cheap one 
at least for the children who were two and older the cheap one still didn t work on the kids who were younger .
and so he went forth to the people and he said i ve made this wonderful finding it looks as if we could just use the cheap and simple solution 
and by doing so we could save ourselves million dollars a year and we could spend that on our children in other ways . 
we would lose all of our market . 
and people were very angry and they called him horrible names .
and he decided that maybe he should leave the country for a few days and seek out some more intelligent open minded people in a place called oxford 
and come and try and tell the story at that place .
and so anyway here i am . it s not a fairy tale .
it s a true story about the united states today and the disease i m referring to is actually motor vehicle accidents for children .
and the free cure is adult seatbelts and the expensive cure the million dollar a year cure is child car seats .
what is it that makes that true ?
and then finally talk a little bit about a third way about another technology which is probably better than anything we have but which there hasn t been any enthusiasm for adoption precisely because people are so enamored with the current car seat solution . ok .
so many times when you try to do research on data it records complicated stories it s hard to find in the data . it doesn t turn out to be the case when you look at seatbelts versus car seats .
so the united states keeps a data set of every fatal accident that s happened since .
so in every car crash in which at least one person dies they have information on all of the people .
so if you look at that data it s right up on the national highway transportation safety administration s website 
you can just look at the raw data and begin to get a sense of the limited amount of evidence that s in favor of car seats for children aged two and up .
so here is the data . here i have among two to six year olds anyone above six basically no one uses car seats so you can t compare . percent of the children who are unrestrained in a crash in which at least one person dies themselves die .
if you put a child in a car seat . percent of the children die .
so what we do in the study is and this is just presenting the same information but turned into a figure to make it easier .
so the yellow bar represents car seats the orange bar lap and shoulder and the red bar lap only seatbelts .
and this is all relative to unrestrained 
the bigger the bar the better . okay .
so this is the data i just showed ok ?
so the highest bar is what you re striving to beat .
so you can control for the basic things like how hard the crash was what seat the child was sitting in etc . the age of the child .
and that s that middle set of bars .
and so you can see that the lap only seatbelts start to look worse once you do that .
and then finally the last set of bars which are really controlling for everything you could possibly imagine about the crash 
 different characteristics of the crash .
and what you find is that the car seats and the lap and shoulder belts when it comes to saving lives fatalities look exactly identical .
and the standard error bands are relatively small around these estimates as well .
and it s not just overall . it s very robust to anything you want to look at .
one thing that s interesting if you look at frontal impact crashes when the car crashes the front hits into something indeed what you see is that the car seats look a little bit better .
and i think this isn t just chance .
in order to have the car seat approved you need to pass certain federal standards all of which involve slamming your car into a direct frontal crash .
but when you look at other types of crashes like rear impact crashes indeed the car seats don t perform as well .
and i think that s because they ve been optimized to pass as we always expect people to do to optimize relative to bright line rules about how affected the car will be .
and the other thing you might argue is well car seats have got a lot better over time .
and so if we look at recent crashes the whole data set is almost years worth of data you won t see it in the recent crashes . the new car seats are far far better . 
but indeed in recent crashes the lap and shoulder seatbelts actually are doing even better than the car seats .
they say well that s impossible that can t be . 
and the line of argument if you ask parents is but car seats are so expensive and complicated and they have this big tangle of latches how could they possibly not work better than seatbelts because they are so expensive and complicated ? 
it s kind of an interesting logic i think that people use . and the other logic they say well the government wouldn t have told us to use them if they weren t much better . 
but what s interesting is the government telling us to use them is not actually based on very much .
it really is based on some impassioned pleas of parents whose children died after they turned two 
which has led to the passage of all these laws not very much on data .
so you can only get so far i think in telling your story by using these abstract statistics .
and so i had some friends over to dinner and i was asking we had a cookout i was asking them what advice they might have for me about proving my point . they said why don t you run some crash tests ? 
and i said that s a great idea . 
so we actually tried to commission some crash tests .
and it turns out that as we called around to the independent crash test companies around the country none of them wanted to do our crash test
because they said some explicitly some not so explicitly all of our business comes from car seat manufacturers .
we can t risk alienating them by testing seatbelts relative to car seats . now eventually one did . under the conditions of anonymity they said they would be happy to do this test for us 
so anonymity and dollars per seat that we crashed .
and so we went to buffalo new york and here is the precursor to it .
these are the crash test dummies waiting for their chance to take the center stage .
and then here s how the crash test works .
here they don t actually crash the entire car you know it s not worth ruining a whole car to do it .
so they just have these bench seats and they strap the car seat and the seatbelt onto it .
so i just wanted you to look at this .
and i think this gives you a good idea of why parents think car seats are so great . look at the kid in the car seat .
does he not look content ready to go like he could survive anything ? and then if you look at the kid in back it looks like he s already choking before the crash even happens .
it s hard to believe when you look at this that that kid in back is going to do very well when you get in a crash .
so this is going to be a crash where they re going to slam this thing forward into a wall at miles an hour and see what happens . ok ?
so let me show you what happens .
these are three year old dummies by the way .
so here this is the car seat . now watch two things 
watch how the head goes forward and basically hits the knees and this is in the car seat 
and watch how the car seat flies around in the rebound up in the air .
the car seat s moving all over the place .
bear in mind there are two things about this .
this is a car seat that was installed by someone who has installed car seats who knew exactly how to do it .
and also it turned out these bench seats are the very best way to install car seats .
having a flat back makes it much easier to install them .
and so this is a test that s very much rigged in favor of the car seat 
ok ? so that kid in this crash fared very well .
the federal standards are that you have to score below a to be an approved car seat on this crash in some metric of units which are not important .
and this crash would have been about a .
so this car seat was actually an above average car seat from consumer reports and did quite well .
anyway it turns out that those two crashes that actually the three year old did slightly worse . so he gets about a out of you know on this range relative to a and something .
but still if you just took that data from that crash to the federal government and said i have invented a new car seat .
i would like you to approve it for selling then they would say this is a fantastic new car seat it works great .
it only got a it could have gotten as high up as a . 
and this seatbelt would have passed with flying colors into being approved as a car seat .
so in some sense what this is suggesting is that it s not just that people are setting up their car seats wrong which is putting children at risk . it s just that fundamentally the car seats aren t doing much .
so here s the crash . so these are timed at the same time 
so you can see that it takes much longer with the car seat at rebound it takes a lot longer but there s just a lot less movement for child who s in the seatbelt .
so i ll show you the six year old crashes as well .
the six year old is in a car seat and it turns out that looks terrible but that s great . that s like a ok ?
so that kid would do fine in the crash .
nothing about that would have been problematic to the child at all .
and then here s the six year old in the seatbelt 
and in fact they get exactly within you know within one or two points of the same . so really for the six year old the car seat did absolutely nothing whatsoever .
that s some more evidence so in some sense i was criticized by a scientist who said you could never publish a study with an n of meaning those four crashes .
so i wrote him back and i said what about an n of ? 
because i had the other other real world crashes .
and i just think that it s interesting that the idea of using real world crashes which is very much something that economists think would be the right thing to do is something that scientists don t actually usually think 
they would rather use a laboratory a very imperfect science of looking at the dummies than actually years of data of what we ve seen with children and with car seats .
and so i think the answer to this puzzle is that there s a much better solution out there that s gotten nobody excited because everyone is so delighted with the way car seats are presumably working .
i mean why not start who s sitting in the back seat anyway except for kids ?
but essentially do something like this 
which i don t know exactly how much it would cost to do but there s no reason i could see why this should be much more expensive than a regular car seat .
it s just actually you see this is folding up it s behind the seat .
you ve got a regular seat for adults and then you fold it down and the kid sits on top and it s integrated .
it seems to me that this can t be a very expensive solution and it s got to work better than what we already have .
so the question is is there any hope for adoption of something like this which would presumably save a lot of lives ?
and i think the answer perhaps lies in a story .
you were allowed to do things then you can t do today .
so my father would have patients come in who he thought were not really sick .
and he had a big jar full of placebo pills that he would give them 
and he d say come back in a week if you still feel lousy . 
ok and most of them would not come back 
but some of them would come back .
and when they came back he still convinced they were not sick had another jar of pills . in this jar were huge horse pills .
they were almost impossible to swallow .
and these to me are the analogy for the car seats .
people would look at these and say man this thing is so big and so hard to swallow . if this doesn t make me feel better you know what possibly could ? 
and it turned out that most people wouldn t come back because it worked . but every once in a while there was still a patient convinced that he was sick and he d come back . and my dad had a third jar of pills .
and the jar of pills he had he said were the tiniest little pills he could find so small you could barely see them .
and he would say listen i know i gave you that huge pill that complicated hard to swallow pill before 
but now i ve got one that s so potent that is really tiny and small and almost invisible .
it s almost like this thing here which you can t even see . 
and it turned out that never in all the times my dad gave out this pill the really tiny pill did anyone ever come back still complaining of sickness .
and that s completely possible . and if that s the case then i think we re stuck with conventional car seats for a long time to come .
thank you very much .
 audience i just wanted to ask you when we wear seatbelts we don t necessarily wear them just to prevent loss of life it s also to prevent lots of serious injury .
your data looks at fatalities . it doesn t look at serious injury .
is there any data to show that child seats are actually less effective or just as effective as seatbelts for serious injury ? because that would prove your case . 
steven levitt yeah that s a great question . in my data and in another data set i ve looked at for new jersey crashes i find very small differences in injury .
so in this data it s statistically insignificant differences in injury between car seats and lap and shoulder belts .
in the new jersey data which is different because it s not just fatal crashes but all crashes in new jersey that are reported 
it turns out that there is a percent difference in injuries but generally they re the minor injuries .
now what s interesting i should say this as a disclaimer there is medical literature that is very difficult to resolve with this other data which suggests that car seats are dramatically better .
and they use a completely different methodology that involves after the crash occurs they get from the insurance companies the names of the people who were in the crash and they call them on the phone and they asked them what happened .
and i really can t resolve yet and i d like to work with these medical researchers to try to understand how there can be these differences which are completely at odds with one another .
but it s obviously a critical question .
the question is even if are there enough serious injuries to make these cost effective ? it s kind of tricky .
even if they re right it s not so clear that they re so cost effective .
i don t know your name . audience member howard . howard .
thom mayne howard ? i m sitting next to howard . i don t know howard obviously 
and he s going i hope you re not next .
amazing . amazing performance .
i kind of erased everything in my brain to follow that .
let me start some place . i m interested i kind of do the same thing but i don t move my body . and instead of using human figures to develop ideas of time and space 
i work in the mineral world . i work with more or less inert matter .
because i have to say for my whole career if there s anything that s been consistent it s been that you can t do it .
no matter what i ve done what i ve tried to do everybody says it can t be done .
and it s continuous across the complete spectrum of the various kind of realities that you confront with your ideas .
and to be an architect somehow you have to negotiate between left and right and you have to negotiate between this very private place where ideas take place and the outside world and then make it understood .
it s calvino s idea of the quickest way between two points is the circuitous line not the straight line .
and definitely my life has been part of that .
i m going to start with some simple kind of notions of how we organize things .
but basically what we do is we try to give coherence to the world .
we make physical things buildings that become a part in an accretional process they make cities .
and those things are the reflection of the processes and the time that they are made .
and what i m doing is attempting to synthesize the way one sees the world and the territories which are useful as generative material .
because really all i m interested in always as an architect is the way things are produced because that s what i do . right ?
and it s not based on an a priori notion .
it doesn t work that way for me at all .
i have no interest in that whatsoever .
architecture is the beginning of something because it s if you re not involved in first principles if you re not involved in the absolute the beginning of that generative process it s cake decoration .
and i ve nothing wrong with cake decoration and cake decorators if anybody s involved in cake decorations it s not what i m interested in doing . and so in the formation of things in giving it form in concretizing these things it starts with some notion of how one organizes .
and i ve had for years an interest in a series of complexities where a series of forces are brought to bear and to understand the nature of the final result of that representing the building itself .
there s been a continual relationship between inventions which are private and reality which has been important to me .
a project which is part of an exhibition in copenhagen years ago which was the modeling of a hippocampus the territory of the brain that records short term memory 
and the documentation of that the imaginative and documentation of that through a series of drawings which literally attempt to organize that experience .
and it had to do with the notion of walking a kilometer observing every kilometer a particular object of desire and then placing that within this .
and then this led to broader ideas of buildings that come together through the multiplicity of systems .
and it s not any single system that makes the work .
it s the relationship it s the dynamics between the systems which have the power to transform and invent and produce an architecture that is that would otherwise not exist .
and those systems could be identified and they could be grouped together .
and of course today with the technology of the computer and with the rapid prototyping etc . we have the mechanisms to understand and to respond to these systems 
and to allow them to adjust to the various accommodations of functionalities
because that s all we do .
we re producing spaces that accommodate human activity .
and what i m interested in is not the styling of that but the relationship of that as it enhances that activity .
and that directly connects to ideas of city making .
this is a project that we just finished in penang
for a very very large city project that came directly out of this process 
which is the result of the multiplicity of forces that produce it .
and the project again enormous enormous competition on the hudson river and in new york
that we were asked to do three years ago which uses these processes .
and what you re looking at are possibilities that have to do with the generation of the city as one applies a methodology
that uses notions of these multiple forces that deals with the enormity of the problem the complexity of the problem when we re designing cities at larger and larger aggregates .
because one of the issues today is that the economic aggregate is driving the development aggregate and as the aggregates get larger we require more and more complex investigation processes to solve these problems .
and that led us directly to the olympic village . i was in new york on monday presenting it to the ioc .
we won the competition what was it nine months ago ?
again a direct reflection from using these processes to develop extremely complicated very large scale organisms .
and then also was working with broad strategies .
in this case we only used of the acres of land and the acres was a park and would become the legacy of the olympic village .
and it would become the second largest park in the boroughs etc .
its position of course in the middle of manhattan it s on hunter s point .
and then the broader ideas of city making start having direct influences on architecture 
on the elements that make up the broader scheme the buildings themselves and start guiding us .
architecture for me has been an investigation of a multiplicity of forces that could come from literally any place .
and so i can start this discussion in any number of places 
and i ve chosen three or four to talk about .
and it has also to do with an interest in the vast kind of territory that architecture touches .
it literally is connected to anything in terms of knowledge base .
there s just no place that it doesn t somehow have a connective tissue to .
this is jim dine and it s the absence of presence etc .
it s the clothing the skin without the presence of the character .
it became kind of an idea for the notion of the surface of a work 
and it was used in a project where we could unravel that surface 
and it was a figurative idea that was going to be folded and made into a very kind of complex space .
and the idea was the relationship of the space which was made up of the fold of the image and the dialectic or the conflict between the figuration and the clarity of the image and the complexity of the space which were in dialog .
and it made us rethink the whole notion of how we work and how we make things 
and it led us to ideas that were closer to fashion design as we flattened out surfaces and then brought them back together as they could make spatial combinations .
and this was the first prototype in korea 
as we re dealing with a dynamic envelope 
and then the same characteristic of the fabric . it has a material identity and it s translucent and it s porous 
and it allows us for a very different notion of what a skin of a building is .
and that turned right away into another project .
this is the caltrans building in los angeles .
and now we re seeing as the skin and the body is differentiated .
again it s a very very simple notion .
if you look at most buildings what you look at is the building the facade and it is the building .
and all of a sudden we re kind of moving away and we re separating the skin from the body and that s going to lead to broader performance criteria which i m going to talk about in a minute .
and you re looking at how it drapes over and differentiates from the body .
and then again the building itself middle of los angeles right across from city hall .
and as it moves it takes pieces of the earth with it . it bends up .
it s part of a sign system which was part of the kind of legacy of los angeles the two dimension three dimension signing etc .
and then it allows one to penetrate the work itself .
it s transparent and it allows you to understand i think what is always the most interesting thing in any building which is the actual constructional processes that make it .
and it s probably the most intense kind of territory of the work which is not occupied because architecture is always the most interesting in some mechanism when it s separated from function 
and this is an area that allows for that .
and then the skin starts transforming into other materials .
we re using light as a building material in this case .
we re working with keith sonnier in new york and we re making this large outside room which is possible in los angeles and which is very much reflective of the urban the contemporary urban environments that you would find in shibuya or you d find in mexico city or sao paulo etc . 
that have to do with activating the city over a longer span of time .
and that was very much part of the notion of the urban objective of this project in los angeles .
and again all of it promoting transparency .
and an image which may be closest talks about the use of light as a medium 
that light becomes literally a building material .
well that immediately turned into something much broader and as a scope .
and again we re looking at an early sketch where i m understanding now that the skin can be a transition between the ground and the tower .
this is a building in san francisco which is under construction . and now it turned into something much much broader as a problem and it has to do with performance .
this will be the first building in the united states that took well i can t say it took the air conditioning out . it s a hybrid .
i wanted a pure thing and i can t get it .
it s a wrong attitude actually because the hybrid is probably more interesting .
but we took the air conditioning out of the tower .
there s some air conditioning left in the base 
but the skin now moves on hydraulics .
it forces air through a venturi force if there s no wind .
it adjusts continually . and we removed the air conditioning .
huge huge thing . half a million dollars a year delta .
 of these it s just under a million square feet and some thousand square feet of these would power sausalito the delta on this .
and so now what we re looking at as the projects get larger in scale as they interface with broader problems that they expand the capabilities in terms of their performance .
well i could also start here .
we could talk about the relationship at a more biological sense of the relationship of building and ground .
well our research my generation for sure people who were going to school in the late s made very much a shift out of the internal focus of architecture looking at architecture within its own territory 
and we were much more affected by film by what was going on in the art world etc .
this is of course michael heizer .
and when i saw this first an image and then visited it completely changed the way i thought after that point .
and i understood that building really could be the augmentation of the earth s surface and it completely shifted the notion of building ground in the most basic sense .
and then well he was probably looking at this this is nazca this is years ago the most amazing four kilometer land sculptures .
they re just totally incredible .
and that led us to then completely rethinking how we draw how we work .
this is the first sketch of a high school in pomona well whatever it is a model a conceptual kind of idea .
and it s the reshaping of the earth to make it occupiable .
so it puts square feet of stuff that make a high school work in the surface of that earth .
there it is modeled as it was developing into a piece of work .
and there it is again as it s starting to get resolved tectonically 
and then there s the school .
and of course we re interested in participating with education .
i have absolutely no interest in producing a building that just accommodates x y and z function .
what i m interested in are how these ideas participate in the educational process of young people .
it demands some sort of notion of inquiry because it s a system that s developed not sculpturally .
it s an idea that started from my first discussion . it has to do with a broad consistent logic and that logic could be understood as one occupies the building .
and there s an overt at least there s an attempt to make a very overt notion of a building that connects to the land in a very different way
because i was interested in a very didactic approach to the problem as one would understand that .
and the second project that was just finished in los angeles
that uses some of the same ideas . it uses landscape as a major idea .
then again we re doing the headquarters for noaa national oceanographic and atmospheric agency outside of washington in maryland .
and this is how they see the world .
they have satellites zipping around at plus or minus miles 
and the site s in red .
and we wanted them to look down at their satellite how they see their own site that eight acre site 
and we wanted nothing left . we wanted it to stay green .
there s actually three baseball fields on it right now and they re going to stay there .
we put one piece directly north south and it holds the dishes at the ears right ?
and then right below that the processing and the mission lift and the mission control room and all the other spaces are underground .
and what you look at is an aircraft carrier that s performance driven by the cone vision of these satellite dishes .
and that the building itself is occupied in the lower portion broken up by a series of courts and it s five acres of uninterrupted horizontal space for their administrative offices .
and then that in turn propelled us to look at larger scale projects where this notion of landscape building interface becomes a connective tissue .
the new capital competition for berlin four years ago .
and becomes part of the connective fabric the social cultural and the landscape recreational fabric of the city .
and the building is no longer seen as an autonomous thing 
but something that s only inextricably connected to this city and this place at this time .
and a project that was realized in austria the hooper bank which again used this idea of connecting typology the traditional buildings and morphology or the relationship of the development of land as an idea 
into a complex which is a piece of a city where we can see part of it is literally just this augmenting this movement of the land that s a very simple idea of just lifting it up and occupying it and other parts are much more energetic and intense .
and talk about that intensity
in terms of the collisions of the kind of events they make that have to do with putting a series of systems together 
and then where part of it is in the ground part of it is oppositional lifts .
one enters the building as it lifts off the ground and it becomes part of the idea .
and then the skin the edges of this all promote the dynamic the movement of the building
as a series of seismic shifts geologic shifts . right ?
and it makes for event space and then it breaks in places that allow you to peer into the interior and those interiors again are promoting transparency for the workplace which has been a continual interest of ours .
and then again in a more kind of traditional setting this is a graduate student housing in toronto and it s very much about the relationship of a building as it makes a connective tissue to the city .
the main idea was the gateway where it breaks the site and the building occupies both the public space and the private space .
and it s that territory of it s this thing .
i visited the site many times and everybody kind of you can see this from two kilometers away it s an exact center of the street 
and the whole notion is to engage the public 
to engage buildings as part of the public tissue of the city .
and finally one of the most interesting projects it s a courthouse .
and what i want to talk about this is the supreme court of course and well i m dealing with michael hogan the chief justice of oregon .
you could not proceed without making this negotiation between one s own values and the relationship of the character you re working with and how he understands the court 
because i m showing him of course corbusier at savoy 
which is which is the beginning of modern architecture .
well then we get to this image .
and this is where the project started . because i m going i m interested in the phenomenon that s taking place in here .
and really what we re talking about is constructing reality .
and i m a character that s extremely interested in understanding the nature of that constructed reality
because there s no such thing as nature any more . nature is gone .
nature in the th century sense alright ?
nature is only a cultural edifice today right ?
we construct it and we construct those ideas .
and then of course this one our governor at the moment .
and we spent some time with conan believe it or not 
and then that led us to kind of the very differences of our worlds from a legal and an artistic architectural .
and it forced us to talk about notions of how we work and the dynamics of that and what other sources of the work is .
and it led us to the project the courthouse 
which is absolutely a part of a negotiation between tradition and pieces of the traditional courthouse .
you ll find a stair that s the same length as the supreme court .
here s a piano nobile which is a device used in the renaissance .
the courts were made of that . the skin is this series of layers
that reflect even rusticated stonework but which were embedded with fragments of the constitution which were part of the little process all set on a plinth that defined it from the community .
thank you so much .
i was asked to come here and speak about creation .
and i only have minutes and i see they re counting already .
and i can in minutes i think i can touch only a very rather janitorial branch of creation which i call creativity . 
creativity is how we cope with creation .
while creation sometimes seems a bit un graspable or even pointless creativity is always meaningful .
see for instance in this picture .
you know creation is what put that dog in that picture 
and creativity is what makes us see a chicken on his hindquarters .
when you think about you know creativity has a lot to do with causality too .
you know when i was a teenager i was a creator .
i just did things .
then i became an adult and started knowing who i was and tried to maintain that persona i became creative .
though it s actually true you know 
the reason i m talking to you right now is because i was born in brazil .
if i was born in monterey probably would be in brazil .
you know i was born in brazil and grew up in the s under a climate of political distress 
and i was forced to learn to communicate in a very specific way in a sort of a semiotic black market .
you couldn t really say what you wanted to say you had to invent ways of doing it .
you didn t trust information very much .
that led me to another step of why i m here today is because i really liked media of all kinds .
i was a media junkie and eventually got involved with advertising .
my first job in brazil was actually to develop a way to improve the readability of billboards and based on speed angle of approach and actually blocks of text .
it was very actually it was a very good study and got me a job in an ad agency .
and they also decided that i had to to give me a very ugly plexiglas trophy for it .
and another point why i m here is that the day i went to pick up the plexiglas trophy i rented a tuxedo for the first time in my life picked the thing didn t have any friends .
on my way out i had to break a fight apart .
somebody was hitting somebody else with brass knuckles .
they were in tuxedos and fighting . it was very ugly .
the first person was wearing a black tie a tuxedo . it was me .
luckily it wasn t fatal as you can all see .
and even more luckily the guy said that he was sorry and i bribed him for compensation money otherwise i press charges .
you know i became i took this very iconoclastic approach .
because when i decided to go into advertising i wanted to do i wanted to airbrush naked people on ice for whiskey commercials 
that s what i really wanted to do . but i they didn t let me do it so i just you know they would only let me do other things .
but i wasn t into selling whiskey i was into selling ice .
the first works were actually objects .
it was kind of a mixture of found object product design and advertising .
and i called them relics .
they were displayed first at stux gallery in .
this is the clown skull .
is a remnant of a race of a very evolved race of entertainers .
they lived in brazil long time ago . this is the ashanti joystick .
unfortunately it has become obsolete because it was designed for atari platform .
a playstation ii is in the works maybe for the next ted i ll bring it .
the rocking podium . this is the pre columbian coffeemaker . actually the idea came out of an argument that i had at starbucks that i insisted that i wasn t having colombian coffee 
the coffee was actually pre columbian .
the bonsai table .
the entire encyclopedia britannica bound in a single volume for travel purposes .
and the half tombstone for people who are not dead yet .
i wanted to take that into the realm of images and i decided to make things that had the same identity conflicts .
so i decided to do work with clouds .
because clouds can mean anything you want .
but now i wanted to work in a very low tech way 
so something that would mean at the same time a lump of cotton a cloud and durer s praying hands although this looks a lot more like mickey mouse s praying hands .
but i was still you know this is a kitty cloud .
they re called equivalents after alfred stieglitz s work .
 the snail . 
but i was still working with sculpture and i was really trying to go flatter and flatter .
 the teapot . 
i had a chance to go to florence in i think it was and i saw ghiberti s door of paradise . 
and he did something that was very tricky .
he put together two different media from different periods of time .
first he got an age old way of making it which was relief and he worked this with three point perspective which was brand new technology at the time .
and it s totally overkill .
and your eye doesn t know which level to read .
and you become trapped into this kind of representation .
so i decided to make these very simple renderings that at first they are taken as a line drawing 
you know something that s very and then i did it with wire .
the idea was to because everybody overlooks white like pencil drawings you know ?
and they would look at it ah it s a pencil drawing . 
then you have this double take and see that it s actually something that existed in time .
it had a physicality and you start going deeper and deeper into sort of narrative that goes this way towards the image . so this is monkey with leica . 
 relaxation . 
 fiat lux . 
and the same way the history of representation evolved from line drawings to shaded drawings .
and i wanted to deal with other subjects .
i started taking that into the realm of landscape which is something that s almost a picture of nothing .
i made these pictures called pictures of thread and i named them after the amount of yards that i used to represent each picture .
these always end up being a photograph at the end or more like an etching in this case .
so this is a lighthouse .
this is yards after corot . yards after gerhard richter .
and i don t know how many yards after john constable .
departing from the lines i decided to tackle the idea of points like which is more similar to the type of representation that we find in photographs themselves .
i had met a group of children in the caribbean island of saint kitts and i did work and play with them .
i got some photographs from them .
upon my arrival in new york i decided they were children of sugar plantation workers .
and by manipulating sugar over a black paper i made portraits of them .
these are thank you . this is valentina the fastest . 
it was just the name of the child with the little thing you get to know of somebody that you meet very briefly .
 valicia . 
 jacynthe . 
but another layer of representation was still introduced .
because i was doing this while i was making these pictures 
i realized that i could add still another thing
i was trying to make a subject something that would interfere with the themes so chocolate is very good because it has it brings to mind ideas that go from scatology to romance .
and so i decided to make these pictures and they were very large so you had to walk away from it to be able to see them .
so they re called pictures of chocolate . 
freud probably could explain chocolate better than i . he was the first subject .
and jackson pollock also .
pictures of crowds are particularly interesting because you know you go to that you try to figure out the threshold with something you can define very easily like a face goes into becoming just a texture .
 paparazzi . 
i used the dust at the whitney museum to render some pieces of their collection .
and i picked minimalist pieces because they re about specificity .
and you render this with the most non specific material which is dust itself .
like you know you have the skin particles of every single museum visitor .
they do a dna scan of this they will come up with a great mailing list .
this is richard serra .
i bought a computer and they told me it had millions of colors in it .
you know an artist s first response to this is who counted it ? you know ?
and i realized that i never worked with color because i had a hard time controlling the idea of single colors .
but once they re applied to numeric structure then you can feel more comfortable .
so the first time i worked with colors was by making these mosaics of pantone swatches .
they end up being very large pictures and i photographed with a very large camera an x camera .
so you can see the surface of every single swatch like in this picture of chuck close .
and you have to walk very far to be able to see it .
also the reference to gerhard richter s use of color charts and the idea also entering another realm of representation that s very common to us today which is the bit map .
i ended up narrowing the subject to monet s haystacks . 
this is something i used to do as a joke you know make the same like robert smithson s spiral jetty and then leaving traces as if it was done on a tabletop .
i tried to prove that he didn t do that thing in the salt lake .
but then just doing the models i was trying to explore the relationship between the model and the original .
and i felt that i would have to actually go there and make some earthworks myself .
i opt for very simple line drawings kind of stupid looking .
and at the same time i was doing these very large constructions being meters away . now i would do very small ones which would be like 
but under the same light and i would show them together so the viewer would have to really figure it out what one he was looking .
i wasn t interested in the very large things or in the small things .
i was more interested in the things in between you know because you can leave an enormous range for ambiguity there .
this is like you see the size of a person over there .
this is a pipe .
a hanger .
and this is another thing that i did you know working
 everybody loves to watch somebody draw but not many people have a chance to watch somebody draw in a lot of people at the same time to evidence a single drawing .
and i love this work 
because i did these cartoonish clouds over manhattan for a period of two months .
and it was quite wonderful because i had an interest an early interest in theater that s justified on this thing .
in theater you have the character and the actor in the same place trying to negotiate each other in front of an audience .
and in this you d have like a something that looks like a cloud and it is a cloud at the same time .
so they re like perfect actors .
my interest in acting especially bad acting goes a long way .
actually i once paid like dollars to see a very great actor to do a version of king lear and i felt really robbed because by the time the actor started being king lear he stopped being the great actor that i had paid money to see .
on the other hand you know i paid like three dollars i think and i went to a warehouse in queens to see a version of othello by an amateur group .
see i think it s not really about impression making people fall for a really perfect illusion as much as it is to make i usually work at the lowest threshold of visual illusion .
because it s not about fooling somebody it s actually giving somebody a measure of their own belief how much you want to be fooled .
that s why we pay to go to magic shows and things like that .
well i think that s it .
my time is nearly up .
thank you very much .
a fact came out of mit couple of years ago . ken hale 
who s a linguist said that of the languages spoken on earth right now aren t spoken by the children . so that in one generation we re going to halve our cultural diversity .
he went on to say that every two weeks an elder goes to the grave carrying the last spoken word of that culture .
so an entire philosophy a body of knowledge about the natural world that had been empirically gleaned over centuries goes away .
and this happens every two weeks .
so for the last years since my dental experience i have been traveling the world and coming back with stories about some of these people .
what i d like to do right now is share some of those stories with you .
this is tamdin .
she is a year old nun .
she was thrown in prison in tibet for two years for putting up a little tiny placard protesting the occupation of her country .
and when i met her she had just taken a walk over the himalayas from lhasa the capital of tibet into nepal across to india days to meet her leader the dalai lama .
the dalai lama lives in dharamsala india .
so i took this picture three days after she arrived 
and she had this beat up pair of tennis shoes on with her toes sticking out .
and she crossed in march and there s a lot of snow at feet in march .
this is paldin .
paldin is a year old monk .
and he spent years in prison .
his whole monastery was thrown into prison at the time of the uprising when the dalai lama had to leave tibet .
and he was beaten starved tortured lost all his teeth while in prison .
and when i met him he was a kind gentle old man .
and it really impressed me i met him two weeks after he got out of prison that he went through that experience and ended up with the demeanor that he had .
so i was in dharamsala meeting these people and i d spent about five weeks there and i was hearing these similar stories of these refugees that had poured out of tibet into dharamsala .
and it just so happened on the fifth week there was a public teaching by the dalai lama .
and i was watching this crowd of monks and nuns many of which i had just interviewed and heard their stories and i watched their faces and they gave us a little fm radio and we could listen to the translation of his teachings .
and what he said was treat your enemies as if they were precious jewels because it s your enemies that build your tolerance and patience on the road to your enlightenment .
that hit me so hard telling these people that had been through this experience .
so two months later i went into tibet and i started interviewing the people there taking my photographs . that s what i do .
i interview and do portraits .
and this is a little girl .
i took her portrait up on top of the jokhang temple .
and i d snuck in because it s totally illegal to have a picture of the dalai lama in tibet it s the quickest way you can get arrested .
so i snuck in a bunch of little wallet sized pictures of the dalai lama and i would hand them out .
and when i gave them to the people they d either hold them to their heart or they d hold them up to their head and just stay there .
and this is well at the time i did this years ago that was years after the dalai lama had left .
so i was going in interviewing these people and doing their portraits .
this is jigme and her sister sonam .
and they live up on the chang tang the tibetan plateau way in the western part of the country .
this is at feet .
and they had just come down from the high pastures at feet .
same thing gave her a picture she held it up to her forehead .
and i usually hand out polaroids when i do these because i m setting up lights and checking my lights and when i showed her her polaroid she screamed and ran into her tent .
this is tenzin gyatso he was found to be the buddha of compassion at the age of two out in a peasant s house way out in the middle of nowhere .
at the age of four he was installed as the th dalai lama .
as a teenager he faced the invasion of his country and had to deal with it he was the leader of the country .
eight years later when they discovered there was a plot to kill him they dressed him up like a beggar and snuck him out of the country on horseback and took the same trip that tamdin did .
and he s never been back to his country since .
and if you think about this man years later still sticking to this non violent response to a severe political and human rights issue .
and the young people young tibetans are starting to say listen this doesn t work .
you know violence as a political tool is all the rage right now .
and he still is holding this line .
so this is our icon to non violence in our world one of our living icons .
this is another leader of his people .
this is moi . this is in the ecuadorian amazon .
and moi is years old .
and this area of the ecuadorian amazon oil was discovered in .
and in this period of time since that time as much oil or twice as much oil as was spilled in the exxon valdez accident was spilled in this little area of the amazon 
and the tribes in this area have constantly had to move .
and moi belongs to the huaorani tribe and they re known as very fierce they re known as auca . 
and they ve managed to keep out the seismologists and the oil workers with spears and blowguns .
and we spent i was with a team two weeks with these guys out in the jungle watching them hunt .
this was on a monkey hunt hunting with curare tipped darts .
and the knowledge that these people have about the natural environment is incredible .
they could hear things smell things see things i couldn t see .
and i couldn t even see the monkeys that they were getting with these darts .
this is yadira and yadira is five years old . she s in a tribe that s neighboring the huaorani .
and her tribe has had to move three times in the last years because of the oil spills .
and we never hear about that . and the latest infraction against these people is as part of plan colombia we re spraying paraquat or round up whatever it is 
we re defoliating thousands of acres of the ecuadorian amazon in our war on drugs .
and these people are the people who take the brunt of it .
this is mengatoue .
he s the shaman of the huaorani and he said to us you know i m an older man now i m getting tired you know i m tired of spearing these oil workers .
i wish they would just go away .
and as it turned out these guys really taught me a thing or two about blending in with the locals .
one of the things i did just before august of i took my son dax who was at the time and i took him to pakistan .
because at first i wanted you know i ve taken him on a couple of trips but i wanted him to see people that live on a dollar a day or less .
so it was a great experience for him . he stayed up all night with them drumming and dancing .
and he brought a soccer ball and we had soccer every night in this little village .
and then we went up and met their shaman .
by the way mengatoue was the shaman of his tribe as well .
and this is john doolikahn who s the shaman of the kalash .
and he s up in the mountains right on the border with afghanistan .
in fact on that other side is the area tora bora the area where osama bin laden s supposed to be . this is the tribal area .
and we watched and stayed with john doolikahn .
and the shaman i did a whole series on shamanism which is an interesting phenomenon .
but around the world they go into trance in different ways and in pakistan the way they do it is they burn juniper leaves and they sacrifice an animal pour the blood of the animal on the leaves and then inhale the smoke .
and they re all praying to the mountain gods as they go into trance .
and all the security issues they cause us .
so one thing we did five years ago we started a program that links kids in indigenous communities with kids in the united states .
so we first hooked up a spot in the navajo nation with a classroom in seattle .
we now have sites .
we have one in kathmandu nepal dharamsala india takaungu kenya takaungu is one third christian one third muslim and one third animist the community is ollantaytambo peru and arctic village alaska .
this is daniel he s one of our students in arctic village alaska .
he lives in this log cabin no running water no heat other than no windows and high speed internet connection .
and this is i see this rolling out all over this is our site in ollantaytambo peru four years ago where they first saw their first computers now they have computers in their classrooms .
and the way we ve done this we teach digital storytelling to these kids .
and we have them tell stories about issues in their community in their community that they care about .
and this is in peru where the kids told the story about a river that they cleaned up .
and the way we do it is we do it in workshops and we bring people who want to learn digital workflow and storytelling and have them work with the kids .
and just this last year we ve taken a group of teenagers in and this has worked the best .
so our dream is to bring teenagers together so they ll have a community service experience as well as a cross cultural experience as they teach kids in these areas and help them build their communication infrastructure .
this is teaching photoshop in the tibetan children s village in dharamsala .
we have the website where the kids all get their homepage .
this is all their movies . we ve got about movies that these kids have made and they re quite incredible .
the one i want to show you after we get them to make the movies we have a night where we show the movies to the community .
and this is in takaungu we ve got a generator and a digital projector and we re projecting it up against a barn and showing one of the movies that they made .
and if you get a chance you can go to our website and you ll see the incredible work these kids do .
the other thing i wanted to give indigenous people a voice .
that was one of the big motivating factors .
but the other motivating factor is the insular nature of our country .
national geographic just did a roper study of to year olds in our country and in nine other industrialized countries .
it was a two million dollar study .
united states came in second to last in geographic knowledge .
 percent of the kids couldn t find afghanistan or iraq on a map percent couldn t find india percent couldn t find the pacific ocean .
and this is a study that was just done a couple of years ago .
so what i d like to show you now in the couple of minutes i have left is a film that a student made in guatemala .
we just had a workshop in guatemala .
a week before we got to the workshop a massive landslide caused by hurricane stan last october came in and buried people alive in their village .
and this kid lived in the village he wasn t there at the time and this is the little movie he put together about that .
and he hadn t seen a computer before
we did this movie . we taught him photoshop and yeah we can play it .
this is an old mayan funeral chant that he got from his grandfather .
thank you very much .
well i thought there would be a podium so i m a bit scared .
chris asked me to tell again how we found the structure of dna .
and since you know i follow his orders i ll do it .
but it slightly bores me .
and you know i wrote a book . so i ll say something i ll say a little about you know how the discovery was made and why francis and i found it .
and then i hope maybe i have at least five minutes to say what makes me tick now .
in back of me is a picture of me when i was .
i was at the university of chicago in my third year and i was in my third year because the university of chicago let you in after two years of high school .
so you it was fun to get away from high school 
because i was very small and i was no good in sports or anything like that .
but i should say that my background my father was you know raised to be an episcopalian and republican 
but after one year of college he became an atheist and a democrat .
and my mother was irish catholic and but she didn t take religion too seriously .
and by the age of i was no longer going to sunday mass and going on birdwatching walks with my father .
so early on i heard of charles darwin .
i guess you know he was the big hero .
and you know you understand life as it now exists through evolution .
and at the university of chicago i was a zoology major 
and thought i would end up you know if i was bright enough maybe getting a ph .d . from cornell in ornithology .
then in the chicago paper there was a review of a book called what is life ? by the great physicist schrodinger .
and that of course had been a question i wanted to know .
you know darwin explained life after it got started but what was the essence of life ?
and schrodinger said the essence was information present in our chromosomes and it had to be present on a molecule . i d never really thought of molecules before .
you know chromosomes but this was a molecule and somehow all the information was probably present in some digital form . and there was the big question of how did you copy the information ?
so that was the book . and so from that moment on i wanted to be a geneticist understand the gene and through that understand life .
so i had you know a hero at a distance .
it wasn t a baseball player it was linus pauling .
and so i applied to caltech and they turned me down .
so i went to indiana which was actually as good as caltech in genetics and besides they had a really good basketball team .
so i had a really quite happy life at indiana .
and it was at indiana i got the impression that you know the gene was likely to be dna .
and so when i got my ph .d . i should go and search for dna .
so i first went to copenhagen because i thought well maybe i could become a biochemist 
but i discovered biochemistry was very boring .
it wasn t going anywhere toward you know saying what the gene was 
it was just nuclear science . and oh that s the book little book .
you can read it in about two hours .
and but then i went to a meeting in italy .
and there was an unexpected speaker who wasn t on the program and he talked about dna .
and this was maurice wilkins . he was trained as a physicist and after the war he wanted to do biophysics and he picked dna because dna had been determined at the rockefeller institute to possibly be the genetic molecules on the chromosomes .
most people believed it was proteins .
but wilkins you know thought dna was the best bet and he showed this x ray photograph .
sort of crystalline . so dna had a structure even though it owed it to probably different molecules carrying different sets of instructions . so there was something universal about the dna molecule .
so i wanted to work with him but he didn t want a former birdwatcher and i ended up in cambridge england .
so i went to cambridge because it was really the best place in the world then for x ray crystallography . and x ray crystallography is now a subject in you know chemistry departments .
i mean in those days it was the domain of the physicists .
so the best place for x ray crystallography was at the cavendish laboratory at cambridge .
and there i met francis crick .
i went there without knowing him . he was . i was .
and within a day we had decided that maybe we could take a shortcut to finding the structure of dna .
not solve it like you know in rigorous fashion but build a model 
an electro model using some coordinates of you know length all that sort of stuff from x ray photographs .
but just ask what the molecule how should it fold up ?
and the reason for doing so at the center of this photograph is linus pauling . about six months before he proposed the alpha helical structure for proteins . and in doing so 
he banished the man out on the right sir lawrence bragg who was the cavendish professor .
this is a photograph several years later when bragg had cause to smile .
he certainly wasn t smiling when i got there because he was somewhat humiliated by pauling getting the alpha helix and the cambridge people failing because they weren t chemists .
and certainly neither crick or i were chemists so we tried to build a model . and he knew francis knew wilkins .
so wilkins said he thought it was the helix .
x ray diagram he thought was comparable with the helix .
so we built a three stranded model .
the people from london came up .
wilkins and this collaborator or possible collaborator rosalind franklin came up and sort of laughed at our model .
they said it was lousy and it was .
so we were told to build no more models we were incompetent .
and so we didn t build any models and francis sort of continued to work on proteins .
and basically i did nothing . and except read .
you know basically reading is a good thing you get facts .
and we kept telling the people in london that linus pauling s going to move on to dna .
if dna is that important linus will know it .
he ll build a model and then we re going to be scooped .
and in fact he d written the people in london 
could he see their x ray photograph ?
and they had the wisdom to say no . so he didn t have it .
but there was ones in the literature .
actually linus didn t look at them that carefully .
but about oh months after i got to cambridge a rumor began to appear from linus pauling s son who was in cambridge that his father was now working on dna .
and so one day peter came in and he said he was peter pauling and he gave me a copy of his father s manuscripts .
and boy i was scared because i thought you know we may be scooped .
i have nothing to do no qualifications for anything .
and so there was the paper and he proposed a three stranded structure .
and i read it and it was just it was crap .
so this was you know unexpected from the world s and so it was held together by hydrogen bonds between phosphate groups .
well if the peak ph that cells have is around seven those hydrogen bonds couldn t exist .
we rushed over to the chemistry department and said could pauling be right ? and alex hust said no . so we were happy .
and you know we were still in the game but we were frightened that somebody at caltech would tell linus that he was wrong .
and so bragg said build models . 
and a month after we got the pauling manuscript i should say i took the manuscript to london and showed the people .
well i said linus was wrong and that we re still in the game and that they should immediately start building models .
but wilkins said no . rosalind franklin was leaving in about two months and after she left he would start building models .
and so i came back with that news to cambridge and bragg said build models . 
well of course i wanted to build models .
and there s a picture of rosalind . she really you know in one sense she was a chemist but really she would have been trained she didn t know any organic chemistry or quantum chemistry .
she was a crystallographer .
and i think part of the reason she didn t want to build models was she wasn t a chemist whereas pauling was a chemist .
and so crick and i you know started building models and i d learned a little chemistry but not enough .
well we got the answer on the th february .
and it was because of a rule which to me is a very good rule never be the brightest person in a room and we weren t .
we weren t the best chemists in the room .
i went in and showed them a pairing i d done and jerry donohue he was a chemist he said it s wrong .
you ve got the hydrogen atoms are in the wrong place .
i just put them down like they were in the books .
he said they were wrong .
so the next day you know after i thought well he might be right . 
so i changed the locations and then we found the base pairing and francis immediately said the chains run in absolute directions .
and we knew we were right .
so it was a pretty you know it all happened in about two hours .
from nothing to thing .
and we knew it was big because you know if you just put a next to t and g next to c you have a copying mechanism .
so we saw how genetic information is carried .
it s the order of the four bases .
so in a sense it is a sort of digital type information .
and you copy it by going from strand separating .
so you know if it didn t work this way you might as well believe it because you didn t have any other scheme .
but that s not the way most scientists think .
most scientists are really rather dull .
they said we won t think about it until we know it s right .
but you know we thought well it s at least percent right or percent right .
so think about it . the next five years there were essentially something like five references to our work in nature none .
and so we were left by ourselves and trying to do the last part of the trio how do you what does this genetic information do ?
it was pretty obvious that it provided the information to an rna molecule and then how do you go from rna to protein ?
for about three years we just i tried to solve the structure of rna .
it didn t yield . it didn t give good x ray photographs .
i was decidedly unhappy a girl didn t marry me .
it was really you know sort of a shitty time .
so there s a picture of francis and i before i met the girl so i m still looking happy .
but there is what we did when we didn t know where to go forward we formed a club and called it the rna tie club .
george gamow also a great physicist he designed the tie .
he was one of the members . the question was how do you go from a four letter code to the letter code of proteins ?
feynman was a member and teller and friends of gamow .
but that s the only no we were only photographed twice .
and on both occasions you know one of us was missing the tie .
there s francis up on the upper right and alex rich the m .d . turned crystallographer is next to me .
this was taken in cambridge in september of .
and i m smiling sort of forced i think because the girl i had boy she was gone .
and so i didn t really get happy until because then we found out basically you know that there are three forms of rna .
and we knew basically dna provides the information for rna .
rna provides the information for protein .
and that let marshall nirenberg you know take rna synthetic rna put it in a system making protein . he made polyphenylalanine 
polyphenylalanine . so that s the first cracking of the genetic code and it was all over by .
so there that s what chris wanted me to do it was 
so what happened since then ?
well at that time i should go back .
when we found the structure of dna i gave my first talk at cold spring harbor . the physicist leo szilard he looked at me and said are you going to patent this ? 
and but he knew patent law and that we couldn t patent it because you couldn t . no use for it .
and so dna didn t become a useful molecule and the lawyers didn t enter into the equation until years later when boyer and cohen in san francisco and stanford came up with their method of recombinant dna and stanford patented it and made a lot of money .
at least they patented something which you know could do useful things .
and then they learned how to read the letters for the code .
and boom we ve you know had a biotech industry . and 
but we were still a long ways from you know answering a question which sort of dominated my childhood which is how do you nature nurture ?
and so i ll go on . i m already out of time 
but this is michael wigler a very very clever mathematician turned physicist . and he developed a technique which essentially will let us look at sample dna and eventually a million spots along it .
there s a chip there a conventional one . then there s one made by a photolithography by a company in madison called nimblegen which is way ahead of affymetrix .
and we use their technique .
and what you can do is sort of compare dna of normal segs versus cancer .
and you can see on the top that cancers which are bad show insertions or deletions .
so the dna is really badly mucked up whereas if you have a chance of surviving the dna isn t so mucked up .
so we think that this will eventually lead to what we call dna biopsies . before you get treated for cancer you should really look at this technique and get a feeling of the face of the enemy .
it s not a it s only a partial look but it s a i think it s going to be very very useful .
so we started with breast cancer because there s lots of money for it no government money .
and now i have a sort of vested interest i want to do it for prostate cancer . so you know 
you aren t treated if it s not dangerous .
but wigler besides looking at cancer cells looked at normal cells and made a really sort of surprising observation .
which is all of us have about places in our genome where we ve lost a gene or gained another one .
so we re sort of all imperfect . and the question is well if we re around here you know these little losses or gains might not be too bad .
but if these deletions or amplifications occurred in the wrong gene maybe we ll feel sick .
so the first disease he looked at is autism .
and the reason we looked at autism is we had the money to do it .
looking at an individual is about dollars . and the parent of a child with asperger s disease the high intelligence autism had sent his thing to a conventional company they didn t do it .
couldn t do it by conventional genetics but just scanning it we began to find genes for autism .
and you can see here there are a lot of them .
so a lot of autistic kids are autistic because they just lost a big piece of dna .
i mean big piece at the molecular level .
we saw one autistic kid about five million bases just missing from one of his chromosomes .
we haven t yet looked at the parents but the parents probably don t have that loss or they wouldn t be parents .
now so our autism study is just beginning . we got three million dollars .
i think it will cost at least to before you d be in a position to help parents who ve had an autistic child or think they may have an autistic child and can we spot the difference ?
so this same technique should probably look at all .
it s a wonderful way to find genes .
and so i ll conclude by saying we ve looked at people with schizophrenia .
and we thought we d probably have to look at several hundred before we got the picture . but as you can see there s seven out of had a change which was very high .
and yet in the controls there were three .
so what s the meaning of the controls ?
were they crazy also and we didn t know it ?
or you know were they normal ? i would guess they re normal .
and what we think in schizophrenia is there are genes of predisposure and whether this is one that predisposes and then there s only a sub segment of the population that s capable of being schizophrenic .
now we don t have really any evidence of it but i think to give you a hypothesis the best guess is that if you re left handed you re prone to schizophrenia .
 percent of schizophrenic people are left handed and schizophrenia has a very funny genetics which means percent of the people are genetically left handed but only half of it showed . i don t have the time to say .
now some people who think they re right handed are genetically left handed . ok . i m just saying that if you think oh i don t carry a left handed gene so therefore my you know children won t be at risk of schizophrenia . you might . ok ?
so it s to me an extraordinarily exciting time .
we ought to be able to find the gene for bipolar there s a relationship .
and if i had enough money we d find them all this year .
i thank you .
let me show you some images of what i consider to be the cities of tomorrow .
so that s kibera the largest squatter community in nairobi .
this is the squatter community in sanjay gandhi national park in bombay india what s called mumbai these days .
this is hosinia the largest and most urbanized favela in rio de janeiro .
and this is sultanbelyi which is one of the largest squatter communities in istanbul .
they are what i consider to be the cities of tomorrow the new urban world .
now why do i say that ? to tell you about that i have to talk about this fellow here his name is julius .
and i met julius the last week that i was living in kibera .
so i had been there almost three months and i was touring around the city going to different squatter areas
and julius was tagging along and he was bug eyed
and at certain points we were walking around he grabbed my hand for support which is something most kenyans would never consider doing .
they re very polite and they don t get so forward so quickly .
and i found out later that it was julius first day in nairobi 
and he s one of many .
so close to people a day migrate from the rural to the urban areas .
that s and i m going to be fair to the statisticians who talked this morning not almost . million people a week but almost . million people a week but i m a journalist and we exaggerate so almost . million people a week close to million people a year .
and if you do the math that s people every minute .
so that ll be in the minutes that i m given to talk here between two and three thousand people will have journeyed to the cities .
and here are the statistics .
today a billion squatters one in six people on the planet .
 two billion squatters one in four people on the planet .
and the estimate is that in there ll be three billion squatters 
better than one in three people on earth .
so these are the cities of the future and we have to engage them .
and i was thinking this morning of the good life and before i show you the rest of my presentation i m going to violate ted rules here and i m going to read you something from my book as quickly as i can .
because i think it says something about reversing our perception of what we think the good life is .
so the hut was made of corrugated metal set on a concrete pad .
it was a by cell .
armstrong o brian jr . shared it with three other men .
armstrong and his friends had no water they bought it from a nearby tap owner 
no toilet the families in this compound shared a single pit latrine and no sewers or sanitation .
they did have electricity but it was illegal service tapped from someone else s wires and could only power one feeble bulb .
this was southland a small shanty community on the western side of nairobi kenya .
but it could ve been anywhere in the city because more than half the city of nairobi lives like this .
 . million people stuffed into mud or metal huts with no services no toilets no rights .
 armstrong explained the brutal reality of their situation they paid shillings in rent about bucks a month a relatively high price for a kenyan shantytown and they could not afford to be late with the money .
 in case you owe one month the landlord will come with his henchmen and bundle you out . he will confiscate your things armstrong said .
 not one month one day his roommate hilary kibagendi onsomu who was cooking ugali the spongy white cornmeal concoction that is the staple food in the country cut into the conversation .
they called their landlord a wabenzi meaning that he is a person who has enough money to drive a mercedes benz .
hilary served the ugali with a fry of meat and tomatoes 
the sun slammed down on the thin steel roof and we perspired as we ate .
 after we finished armstrong straightened his tie put on a wool sports jacket and we headed out into the glare .
outside a mound of garbage formed the border between southland and the adjacent legal neighborhood of langata .
it was perhaps eight feet tall feet long and feet wide . and it was set in a wider watery ooze .
as we passed two boys were climbing the mount kenya of trash .
they couldn t have been more than five or six years old .
they were barefoot and with each step their toes sank into the muck sending hundreds of flies scattering from the rancid pile .
i thought they might be playing king of the hill but i was wrong .
once atop the pile one of the boys lowered his shorts squatted and defecated .
the flies buzzed hungrily around his legs .
when families people or so share a single latrine a boy pooping on a garbage pile is perhaps no big thing .
but it stood in jarring contrast to something armstrong had said as we were eating that he treasured the quality of life in his neighborhood .
 for armstrong southland wasn t constrained by its material conditions .
instead the human spirit radiated out from the metal walls and garbage heaps to offer something no legal neighborhood could freedom .
 this place is very addictive he had said .
 it s a simple life but nobody is restricting you .
nobody is controlling what you do .
once you have stayed here you cannot go back . he meant back beyond that mountain of trash back in the legal city of legal buildings with legal leases and legal rights .
 once you have stayed here he said you can stay for the rest of your life . so he has hope and this is where these communities start .
this is perhaps the most primitive shanty that you can find in kibera little more than a stick and mud hut next to a garbage heap .
this is getting ready for the monsoon in bombay india .
this is home improvement 
putting plastic tarps on your roof .
this is in rio de janeiro and it s getting a bit better right ?
we re seeing scavenged terra cotta tile and little pieces of signs and plaster over the brick some color 
and this is sulay montakaya s house in sultanbelyi and it s getting even better .
he s got a fence he scavenged a door 
he s got new tile on the roof .
and then you get rocinha and you can see that it s getting even better .
the buildings here are multi story .
they develop you can see on the far right one where it seems to just stack on top of each other room after room after room .
and what people do is they develop their home on one or two stories and they sell their loggia or roof rights and someone else builds on top of their building and then that person sells the roof rights and someone else builds on top of their building .
all of these buildings are made out of reinforced concrete and brick .
and then you get sultanbelyi in turkey where it s even built to a higher level of design .
the crud in the front is mattress stuffing and you see that all over turkey .
people dry out or air out their mattress stuffing on their roofs .
but the green building on behind you can see that the top floor is not occupied so people are building with the possibility of expansion .
and it s built to a pretty high standard of design .
and then you finally get squatter homes like this which is built on the suburban model .
hey that s a single family home in the squatter community .
that s also in istanbul turkey .
they re quite vital places these communities .
this is the main drag of rocinha the estrada da gavea and there s a bus route that runs through it lots of people out on the street .
these communities in these cities are actually more vital than the illegal communities .
they have more things going on in them .
this is a typical pathway in rocinha called a beco these are how you get around the community .
it s on very steep ground .
they re built on the hills inland from the beaches in rio and you can see that the houses are just cantilevered over the natural obstructions .
so that s just a rock in the hillside .
and these becos are normally very crowded and people hump furniture up them or refrigerators up them all sorts of things .
beer is all carried in on your shoulders .
beer is a very important thing in brazil .
this is commerce in kenya right along the train tracks so close to the train tracks that the merchants sometimes have to pull the merchandise out of the way .
this is a marketplace also in kenya toi market lots of dealers in almost everything you want to buy .
those green things in the foreground are mangoes .
this is a shopping street in kibera and you can see that there s a soda dealer a health clinic two beauty salons a bar two grocery stores and a church and more .
it s a typical downtown street it just happens to be self built .
this here on the right hand side is what s called a if you look at the fine print under the awning it s a hotel .
and what hotel means in kenya and india is an eating place .
so that s a restaurant .
people steal electrical power this is rio .
people tap in and they have thieves who are called grillos or crickets 
and they steal the electrical power and wire the neighborhood .
people burn trash to get rid of the garbage and they dig their own sewer channels .
talk about more plastic bags than plankton . and sometimes they have natural trash disposal .
and when they have more money they cement their streets and they put in sewers and good water pipes and stuff like that .
this is water going to rio . people run their water pipes all over the place 
and that little hut right there has a pump in it and that s what people do 
they steal electricity they install a pump and they tap into the water main and pump water up to their houses .
so the question is how do you go from the mud hut village to the more developed city to the even highly developed sultanbelyi ?
i say there are two things .
one is people need a guarantee they won t be evicted .
that does not necessarily mean property rights and i would disagree with hernando de soto on that question because property rights create a lot of complications .
they re most often sold to people and people then wind up in debt and have to pay back the debt 
and sometimes have to sell their property in order to pay back the debt .
there s a whole variety of other reasons why property rights sometimes don t work in these cases but they do need security of tenure .
and they need access to politics and that can mean two things .
that can mean community organizing from below but it can also mean possibilities from above .
and i say that because the system in turkey is notable .
turkey has two great laws that protect squatters .
one is that it s called gecekondu in turkish which means built overnight and if you build your house overnight in turkey you can t be evicted without due process of law if they don t catch you during the night .
and the second aspect is that once you have people in the community you can petition the government to be recognized as a legal sub municipality .
and when you re a legal sub municipality you suddenly have politics .
you re allowed to have an elected government collect taxes provide municipal services and that s exactly what they do .
so these are the civic leaders of the future .
the woman in the center is geeta jiwa .
she lives in one of those tents on the highway median in mumbai .
that s sureka gundi she also lives with her family on the tent along the same highway median .
they re very outspoken . they re very active .
they can be community leaders .
this woman is nine which means grandma in turkish .
and there were three old ladies who lived in that s her self built house behind her and they ve lived there for or years 
and they are the backbone of the community there .
this is richard muthama peter 
and he is an itinerant street photographer in kibera .
he makes money taking pictures of the neighborhood and the people in the neighborhood 
and is a great resource in the community .
and finally my choice to run for mayor of rio is cezinio the fruit merchant with his two kids here 
and a more honest and giving and caring man i don t know .
the future of these communities is in the people and in our ability to work with those people .
so i think the message i take from what i read from the book from what armstrong said and from all these people is that these are neighborhoods .
the issue is not urban poverty .
the issue is not the larger over arching thing .
the issue is for us to recognize that these are neighborhoods 
this is a legitimate form of urban development and that cities have to engage these residents because they are building the cities of the future .
thank you very much .
charles van doren who was later a senior editor of britannica said the ideal encyclopedia should be radical it should stop being safe .
but if you know anything about the history of britannica since it was anything but radical still a very completely safe stodgy type of encyclopedia .
wikipedia on the other hand begins with a very radical idea 
and that s for all of us to imagine a world in which every single person on the planet is given free access to the sum of all human knowledge .
and that s what we re doing . so wikipedia you just saw the little demonstration of it it s a freely licensed encyclopedia . it s written by thousands of volunteers all over the world in many many languages .
it s written using wiki software which is the type of software he just demonstrated so anyone can quickly edit and save and it goes live on the internet immediately .
and everything about wikipedia is managed by virtually an all volunteer staff .
so when yochai is talking about new methods of organization he s exactly describing wikipedia . and what i m going to do today is tell you a little bit more about how it really works on the inside .
so wikipedia s owned by the wikimedia foundation which i founded a nonprofit organization . and our goal the core aim of the wikimedia foundation is to get a free encyclopedia to every single person on the planet .
and so if you think about what that means it means a lot more than just building a cool website .
we re really interested in all the issues of the digital divide poverty worldwide empowering people everywhere to have the information that they need to make good decisions .
and so we re going to have to do a lot of work that goes beyond just the internet .
so there s a lot of opportunities that are going to arise around wikipedia all over the world .
we re funded by donations from the public 
and one of the more interesting things about that is how little money it actually takes to run wikipedia .
so yochai showed you the graph of what the cost of a printing press was .
and i m going to tell you what the cost of wikipedia is . but first i ll show you how big it is .
so we ve got over articles in english .
we ve got two million total articles across many many different languages .
the biggest languages are german japanese french 
all the western european languages are quite big .
but only around one third of all of our traffic to our web clusters to the english wikipedia which is surprising to a lot of people .
a lot of people think in a very english centric way on the internet but for us we re truly global . we re in many many languages .
how popular we ve gotten to be we re a top website and we re more popular than the new york times .
so this is where we get to yochai s discussion .
this shows the growth of wikipedia we re the blue line there and this is the new york times over there .
and what s interesting about this is the new york times website is a huge enormous corporate operation with i have no idea how many hundreds of employees .
we have exactly one employee and that employee is our lead software developer .
and he s only been our employee since january all the other growth before that . . .
so the servers are managed by a ragtag band of volunteers .
all the editing is done by volunteers .
and the way that we re organized is not like any traditional organization you can imagine .
people are always asking well who s in charge of this ? 
or who does that ? and the answer is anybody who wants to pitch in .
it s a very unusual and chaotic thing .
we ve got over servers now in three locations .
these are managed by volunteer system administrators who are online .
i can go online any time of the day or night and see eight to people waiting for me to ask a question or something anything about the servers .
you could never afford to do this in a company .
you could never afford to have a standby crew of people hours a day and do what we re doing at wikipedia .
so we re doing around . billion page views monthly so it s really gotten to be a huge thing .
and everything is managed by the volunteers .
and the total monthly cost for our bandwidth is about dollars .
and that s essentially our main cost .
we could actually do without the employee .
we hired brian because he was working part time for two years and full time at wikipedia 
so we actually hired him so he could get a life and go to the movies sometimes .
so the big question when you ve got this really chaotic organization is why isn t it all rubbish ? why is the website as good as it is ?
first of all how good is it ? well it s pretty good . it isn t perfect but it s much better than you would expect given our completely chaotic model .
so when you saw him make a ridiculous edit to the page about me you think oh this is obviously just going to degenerate into rubbish . 
but when we ve seen quality tests and there haven t been enough of these yet and i m really encouraging people to do more comparing wikipedia to traditional things we win hands down .
so a german magazine compared german wikipedia which is much much smaller than english to microsoft encarta and to brockhaus multimedial 
and we won across the board .
they hired experts to come and look at articles and compare the quality 
and we were very pleased with that result .
so a lot of people have heard about the wikipedia bush kerry controversy .
the media has covered this somewhat extensively .
it started out with an article in red herring .
what i actually said is they re not contentious at all .
so it s a slight misquote . the articles were edited quite heavily .
and it is true that we did have to lock the articles on a couple of occasions .
time magazine recently reported that extreme action sometimes has to be taken and wales locked the entries on kerry and bush for most of . 
this came after i told the reporter that we had to lock it for occasionally a little bit here and there .
so the truth in general is that the kinds of controversies that you would probably think we have within the wikipedia community are not really controversies at all .
articles on controversial topics are edited a lot but they don t cause much controversy within the community .
and the reason for this is that most people understand the need for neutrality .
the real struggle is not between the right and the left that s where most people assume but it s between the party of the thoughtful and the party of the jerks .
and no side of the political spectrum has a monopoly on either of those qualities .
the actual truth about the specific bush kerry incident is that the bush kerry articles were locked less than one percent of the time in 
and it wasn t because they were contentious it was just because there was routine vandalism which happens sometimes even on stage . . . sometimes even reporters have reported to me that they vandalized wikipedia and were amazed that it was fixed so quickly .
and i said you know i always say please don t do that . that s not a good thing .
so how do we do this ?
how do we manage the quality control ?
how does it work ?
so there s a few elements mostly social policies and some elements of the software .
so the biggest and the most important thing
is our neutral point of view policy . this is something that i set down from the very beginning as a core principle of the community that s completely not debatable .
it s a social concept of cooperation so we don t talk a lot about truth and objectivity .
the reason for this is if we say we re only going to write the truth about some topic that doesn t do us a damn bit of good of figuring out what to write because i don t agree with you about what s the truth .
but we have this jargon term of neutrality which has its own long history within the community 
which basically says any time there s a controversial issue wikipedia itself should not take a stand on the issue .
we should merely report on what reputable parties have said about it .
so this neutrality policy is really important for us because it empowers a community that is very diverse to come together and actually get some work done .
so we have very diverse contributors in terms of political religious cultural backgrounds .
by having this firm neutrality policy which is non negotiable from the beginning we ensure that people can work together and that the entries don t become simply a war back and forth between the left and the right .
if you engage in that type of behavior you ll be asked to leave the community .
so real time peer review .
every single change on the site goes to the recent changes page .
so as soon as he made his change it went to the recent changes page .
that recent changes page was also fed into an irc channel which is an internet chat channel that people are monitoring with various software tools .
and people can get rss feeds they can get email notifications of changes .
and then users can set up their own personal watch list .
so my page is on quite a few volunteers watch lists because it is sometimes vandalized .
and therefore what happens is someone will notice the change very quickly and then they ll just simply revert the change .
there s a new pages feed for example 
so you can go to a certain page of wikipedia and see every new page as it s created .
this is really important because a lot of new pages are just garbage that has to be deleted you know asdfasdf . 
but also that s some of the most interesting and fun things some of the new articles .
people will start an article on some interesting topic 
other people will find that intriguing and jump in and help and make it much better .
so we do have edits by anonymous users which is one of the most controversial and intriguing things about wikipedia .
so chris was able to do his change he didn t have to log in or anything 
he just went on the website and made a change .
but it turns out that only about percent of all the edits to the website are done by anonymous users .
and that s a really important thing to understand 
the vast majority of the edits that go on on the website are from a very close knit community of maybe to people who are in constant communication .
and we have over irc channels mailing lists .
all these people know each other . they communicate . we have off line meetings .
these are the people who are doing the bulk of the site .
and they are in a sense semi professionals at what they re doing .
